PIRATES OF THE CARIBBEAN :
DEAD MEN TELL NO TALES Pirates of the Caribbean :
Dead Men Tell No Tales ( released in some countries as Pirates of the Caribbean : Salazar 's Revenge ) is a 2017 American swashbuckler fantasy film , the fifth installment in the Pirates of the Caribbean film series and the sequel to ( 2011 ) .
The film is directed by Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg from a script by Jeff Nathanson , with Jerry Bruckheimer serving again as producer .
Johnny Depp , Kevin McNally and Geoffrey Rush reprise their roles as Jack Sparrow , Joshamee Gibbs and Hector Barbossa , respectively , and are joined in the cast by Javier Bardem , Brenton Thwaites and Kaya Scodelario .
The filmmakers cited the series ' first installment , ( 2003 ) , as inspiration for the script and tone of the film .
Pre - production for the film started shortly before On Stranger Tides was released in early 2011 , with Terry Rossio writing the initial script .
In early 2013 , Jeff Nathanson was hired to write a new script for the film , with Depp being involved in Nathanson 's writing process .
Initially planned for a 2015 release , the film was delayed to 2016 and then to 2017 , after 6 years of development hell , due to script and budget issues .
Principal photography started in Australia in February 2015 , after the Australian government offered Disney $ 20 million in tax incentives , and ended in July 2015 .
Dead Men Tell No Tales was released in conventional , 3D , and IMAX formats on May 26 , 2017 .
The film received mixed reviews and grossed $ 794 million worldwide against an estimated budget between $ 230–320 million .
Dead Men Tell No Tales is the second - lowest grossing installment of the series .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Twelve - year - old Henry Turner boards the Flying Dutchman and informs his father , Will Turner , that the curse which binds Will to the Dutchman and only permits him to step on land once a decade can be broken by the Trident of Poseidon .
Henry intends to recruit Captain Jack Sparrow to help find it , but Will believes this is impossible and orders Henry to leave .
Will and the Dutchman then disappear into the sea , but Henry vows to find Jack and the Trident .
Nine years later , Henry is a sailor in the British Royal Navy .
The ship sails into the supernatural Devil 's Triangle and stumbles upon the wreck of the Silent Mary , whose ghostly crew led by Spanish pirate - hunter Captain Salazar attack .
Salazar spares Henry 's life to deliver a message to Jack : Salazar is coming for him .
In Saint Martin , a young astronomer and horologist named Carina Smyth is sentenced to death for witchcraft but escapes and briefly crosses paths with Jack as he and his crew spectacularly blunder a bank robbery .
Having suffered years of such bad luck , Jack 's crew lose faith and abandon him .
Depressed , Jack trades his magical compass for a drink .
However , this betrayal of the compass frees Salazar and his crew from the Devil 's Triangle .
Carina learns Henry is looking for the Trident 's location and offers to help him using her unknown father 's diary .
Carina and Jack are captured and face execution , but are saved by Henry and Jack 's crew , setting sail on the Dying Gull .
Carina deciphers clues that the stars will lead to an island where the Trident is hidden .
Meanwhile , Captain Barbossa hears from his pirate crew that the revived Captain Salazar has killed several pirates at sea , and learns that the Trident could lead him to a new " treasure " .
Barbossa sets off to find the Trident , until Salazar and his crew appear and destroy Barbossa 's fleet .
Barbossa manages to talk his way out of being killed by offering to help find Jack .
Salazar agrees , wanting revenge on the pirate that caused his demise .
Salazar pursues the Dying Gull , forcing Jack , Henry , and Carina to flee to an island , discovering that Salazar 's crew can not go on land .
After saving Jack from a forced marriage , Barbossa allies himself with Jack , returning his compass and restoring the miniaturized Black Pearl , , to its original size .
They all continue their journey to the Trident 's island , with Barbossa taking command of the Pearl once more .
During the voyage , Jack and Barbossa realize Carina is the latter 's long - lost daughter .
Barbossa tells Jack that he had left her at an orphanage with his diary so she could live a better life , and refuses to tell her the truth so she will continue to believe her father was an astronomer .
Approaching the Trident 's island , the Pearl evades a British Navy warship , which is destroyed by the Silent Mary before the Pearl runs aground on the island .
Jack , Barbossa , and Carina use the island 's magic to part the ocean and open a path to the Trident 's location on the ocean floor .
Salazar captures Henry and inhabits then takes control of him in order to walk on the ocean floor and seize the Trident .
Once he does so , Henry is given his body back and decides to destroy the Trident , breaking all curses upon the sea and restoring Salazar 's crew to life .
However , the divided sea begins to collapse in on itself .
The Pearl lowers its anchor to lift them to safety , but Salazar pursues them , still hell - bent on killing Jack .
Carina realizes that Barbossa is her father when she spots a tattoo on his arm identical to the diary 's cover .
Barbossa sacrifices himself to kill Salazar , allowing the others to escape alive .
Some time later , Henry and Carina reach Port Royal , where Will appears , free from the Dutchman .
His wife , Elizabeth , appears moments later and the Turner family reunites .
Henry and Carina begin a relationship as well .
Jack watches from the Pearl in faux - disgust before sailing away into the horizon , having been accepted by his crew as their captain once again .
In a post - credits scene , Will and Elizabeth sleep in their bed together , when their room is raided by an apparently resurrected Davy Jones .
Will awakens and finds that the room is empty .
Assuming Jones ' appearance to be a nightmare , Will goes back to sleep , oblivious to the presence of a trace of wet barnacles on the floor amid a puddle of seawater .
CAST * Johnny Depp as Captain Jack Sparrow :
The former Captain of the Black Pearl who travels with Henry and Carina in search of the Trident of Poseidon .
Ronning wanted to focus on relatable characters , as in the first film , " where Jack is not the [ lead ... but ] comes in and crashes the party every now and then , " and to make use of Depp 's " comedic genius " .
The film examines Jack 's backstory , with the young Jack portrayed by Anthony De La Torre , whose face was replaced by a CGI replica of Depp as he looked in 21 Jump Street and What 's Eating Gilbert Grape .
Rønning felt de - aging Depp was tricky against the canon of the franchise .
* Javier Bardem as Captain Armando Salazar : The undead Captain of the Silent Mary who seeks revenge on Jack Sparrow and attempts to steal the Trident of Poseidon to kill every pirate at sea .
Bardem set out to imbue the character with " a rage based on dented pride , " owing to his spectacular fall , from a high - ranking commander of a Spanish fleet to being betrayed and trapped in hell by Jack .
With Salazar 's body language , he tried to convey a bull in an arena , " full of rage and need of vengeance , but also wounded .
" It took three hours a day to apply the make - up , which Bardem referred to as having " cold chicken breasts " glued to his face .
* Geoffrey Rush as Captain Hector Barbossa :
Sparrow 's rival and the Captain of the Queen Anne 's Revenge , whose secretly Carina 's biological father .
Barbossa has become extremely wealthy since the previous film , with Rush referring to him as a " corporate pirate , " having amassed a fleet of ships under his command and encrusted his peg - leg with jewels .
* Brenton Thwaites as Henry Turner : The son of Will Turner and Elizabeth Swann who vows to break his father 's curse by searching for the Trident .
The directors were keen to draft a new protagonist relationship with Henry and Carina , stating that " in the middle of a big action scene , you need to be able to lean on the characters and find the heart of that story , and channel the characters ' vulnerability . "
Rønning noted that identity is a major theme in the film , and to Henry and Carina 's story arc : " they are on a similar quest and find common ground in looking for who they are . "
Lewis McGowan portrays a young Henry .
* Kaya Scodelario as Carina Smyth :
A headstrong , altruistic astronomer who was wrongly accused of being a witch .
Scodelario explained the character 's motivation and role , saying , " she is an academic , she 's fighting for the right to study at university because women could n't at that time . "
For the directors , it was important to " modernise it with Henry and Carina , Kaya , especially brought that with her .
She 's a modern woman . "
Scodelario worked with scriptwriter Jeff Nathanson to ensure the character was unique to the series and not a copy of Elizabeth Swann .
She said that female characters often " fall into two camps ; they are either pretty and perfectly put together or completely insane .
Carina has definitely got a little bit of both . "
* Kevin McNally as Joshamee Gibbs :
Captain Jack 's loyal friend and first mate .
* David Wenham as Lieutenant John Scarfield :
The second antagonist of the film and a British Royal Navy officer , who commands the HMS Essex .
* Golshifteh Farahani as Shansa : A sea - witch and ally of Captain Barbossa .
* Stephen Graham as Scrum : A member of Jack Sparrow 's crew and former member of Blackbeard 's crew .
* Martin Klebba as Marty : A member of Jack Sparrow 's crew .
* Giles New and Angus Barnett as Murtogg and Mullroy :
Former Royal Marines turned pirates , who serve Barbossa 's crew on board the Queen Anne 's Revenge .
* Orlando Bloom as Captain William
" Will " Turner Jr. :
A blacksmith - turned - pirate who was transformed into the Captain of the Flying Dutchman at the end of .
Speaking in late 2014 about his possible return to the franchise , Bloom stated that he would like to portray a character outside of his usual role types as a good - looking hero , alluding to the make - up requirements for Davy Jones .
Section::::Cast .
Additionally , Keira Knightley briefly appears at the end in a non - speaking role as Elizabeth Swann , Will 's wife and Henry 's mother .
Adam Brown , Danny Kirrane , and Delroy Atkinson appear as members of Jack 's crew , and in the prison scene , Paul McCartney briefly appears as Jack 's paternal uncle , Uncle Jack .
Alexander Scheer plays a young Captain Edward Teague in a flashback sequence .
A silhouette of Davy Jones , one of the series ' former villains , is seen in the post - credits scene , but actor Bill Nighy had stated that he was not informed about the character 's appearance .
Pablo and Chiquita reprised their role as Jack the Monkey .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Shortly before the release of in 2011 , the cast and crew of the fourth film were told to set aside time in the near future , because Walt Disney Pictures intended to shoot a fifth and sixth film back - to - back .
However , it was later stated that only a fifth film was in the works .
Terry Rossio wrote a script for a fifth film without his partner Ted Elliott .
Rob Marshall was rumoured to return to direct , but declined after choosing to direct Into the Woods ( 2014 ) , a Disney project starring Johnny Depp .
After Marshall passed on the film , many directors were rumored to take over , including Gore Verbinski , who was responsible for the original three films .
Verbinski ultimately passed on the project , feeling that " there 's no reason other than financial " in making the film .
The eventual shortlist included Fredrik Bond , Rupert Sanders , and the eventual choice , Norwegian film duo Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg .
The studio chose them based on their Academy Award - nominated high - sea film Kon - Tiki , and their ability to work with a limited budget .
Rossio 's script draft was ultimately rejected , and the writer stated that a major reason was its use of a female villain , which made actor Johnny Depp " worried that would be redundant to Dark Shadows , which also featured a female villain . "
In January 2013 , Disney hired Jeff Nathanson to work on a script .
Rønning and Sandberg said they were particularly moved by Nathanson 's " funny and touching " script , which convinced them to sign to direct in May , Rønning believing that the script was " all there " but needed scenes to " carry the tradition of Gore Verbinski , bring the emotional core and big action set pieces . "
In August , Rønning and Sandberg revealed that the title would be Dead Men Tell No Tales .
However , the following month producer Jerry Bruckheimer said , " We have an outline everyone loves but the script is not done , " explaining that the release would be postponed beyond summer 2015 .
The studio questioned Depp 's bankability following the financial losses of The Lone Ranger in 2013 , and the screenplay 's first drafts were not approved by Walt Disney Studios chairman Alan Horn , who was concerned about the finished product .
Bruckheimer revealed that script and budget issues were behind the delay , and that Nathanson was at work on a second draft , based on a well - received outline , saying they needed a script and budget everyone would approve .
Depp was also invited to collaborate on the script , with the actor believing it would be the last of the franchise and wanting to end it right .
After the script was accepted , the film was officially green - lit by Disney in July 2014 , with a planned release on July 7 , 2017 .
The directors were inspired by the first film , , stating that the original is thrilling but above all a comedy with heart , and wanted to reinvent the " structure and the dynamics between the characters . "
In addition to recapturing the best of previous franchise installments , the directors had the works of Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton in mind when crafting the tone of the film .
The pair wanted the film to be the " most emotional " of the series , and to explore the roots of Jack Sparrow .
They decided to use Jack 's compass as the " key to unlock Salazar from his hellish prison in the Triangle , " and toned down some of the fantastic elements " to ground it , even in Pirates Of The Caribbean [ sic ] .
"
Geoffrey Rush argued that the pair brought " Euro sensibility to traditional Hollywood franchise thinking , " while Orlando Bloom believed that they had " recaptured the simplicity and charm " of the original film .
Kaya Scodelario said that the producers wanted to take the franchise back to its origins , with a story that gave characters a conclusion while opening new possibilities .
Along with the directors and writers , many of the crew members were new to the franchise , replacing those who had served on the previous four films , with the exception of Bruckheimer , costume designer Penny Rose , and executive producer Chad Oman .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Speaking at the On Stranger Tides press launch in Cannes , Depp said he would play the role so long as it is popular with the public .
In August 2012 , news surfaced that Depp had signed for the fifth film , earning to reprise his role .
One month later , Penélope Cruz stated that in spite of her enjoying playing Angelica in On Stranger Tides , she had not been contacted regarding a fifth film .
Geoffrey Rush had commented on returning as Hector Barbossa in the fifth installment , saying " If they keep shapeshifting this character , absolutely , " and implied that he might return as the villain .
In December 2014 , Rush confirmed his return for the fifth installment , with Barbossa and Jack being " at the heart of it and there 's a whole new set of story lines .
" In late 2011 , about four years after choosing not to return for the fourth installment , Orlando Bloom stated that he would like to return for a fifth film , if offered .
Several weeks after Disney officially green - lit the film , Bloom stated that there were " discussions " about his return to the franchise in September 2014 .
Bloom further commented in December 2014 , saying that while he was not sure whether he would return , there were talks .
He also indicated that Disney could make a soft reboot with the franchise and focus on Will Turner and his son .
Bloom 's participation was kept secret until the Disney D23 in 2015 , after filming had wrapped .
Once the filmmakers started working with Bloom , they decided that they needed to reunite the character with his wife , Elizabeth .
To ensure that Keira Knightley could reprise this role , the production moved for a one - day shoot in London , where she was working .
On December 2 , 2013 , it was reported that Christoph Waltz was in talks to appear as the film 's main antagonist , but he later declined .
The villain was eventually portrayed by Cruz 's husband , Javier Bardem .
In 2014 , Bardem signed on to portray Armando Salazar , who in early scripts was referred to as Captain John Brand .
Bardem had liked the working environment of the fourth movie , which he witnessed accompanying his wife , and stated he was also a fan of the franchise and of Depp 's performance as Jack Sparrow .
Australian actor Brenton Thwaites entered talks for the role of Henry in late November 2014 , after Disney chose him over Taron Egerton , George MacKay , Mitchell Hope , Ansel Elgort and Sam Keeley .
Kaya Scodelario was chosen as the female lead out of a shortlist that included Gabriella Wilde , Alexandra Dowling , Jenna Thiam , and Lucy Boynton .
Her character , Carina , is an astronomer accused of being a witch .
Scodelario confirmed that she was playing " a totally different character " from Elizabeth Swann , and also that she will be Henry 's love interest , given in earlier drafts she was envisioned as a love interest of Sparrow .
Kevin McNally confirmed his return as Joshamee Gibbs in late January .
Shortly after on - location pre - production opened in Australia , Disney issued a casting call to local agents for actors from all ages and experience levels to apply for roles , and as extras in the upcoming film , with casting also open in the US .
Adam Brown , Delroy Atkinson , and Danny Kirrane were revealed as cast members shortly before filming .
As filming begun , two actors from the previous films were confirmed to return , Martin Klebba as Marty and Stephen Graham as Scrum .
Director Joachim Rønning 's two children appear in the film as extras .
Keith Richards expressed interest in reprising his role as Captain Teague , but was unavailable , leading Depp to invite Paul McCartney into appearing as Jack Sparrow 's uncle ( also named Jack ) .
Other actors had expressed interest in reprising their roles from the previous films , such as Tia Dalma portrayer Naomie Harris , and Greg Ellis , even if his character Theodore Groves appeared to die in .
Both Lee Arenberg and Mackenzie Crook commented on the possibility of returning as Pintel and Ragetti .
In an interview on November 7 , 2014 , Crook confirmed that he had received a call of availability from Disney for the film , though he later declined in order to focus on his television series Detectorists .
He said he had felt " pangs of nostalgia " when the cast and crew filmed without him .
Arenberg , who also had a television commitment , to Once Upon a Time , added that he felt like the producers " were n't really trying to court us like they really wanted us . "
FILMING Section::::Filming .
Directors Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg originally stated that shooting would take place in Puerto Rico and New Orleans , and Bruckheimer had previously mentioned that there might be a sequence in Louisiana .
However , a spokesman for Australian Arts Minister George Brandis confirmed that the fifth installment was set to shoot exclusively in Australia , after the government agreed to repurpose $ 20 million of tax incentives , originally intended for the remake of 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea ; thus edging out Mexico and South Africa as filming locations .
According to Australian film industry sources , on location pre - production started in late September 2014 , and its cost was set at around $ 250 million .
Filming took place exclusively in Queensland , Australia , as the largest production to ever shoot in the country .
Village Roadshow Studios and the Whitsunday Islands were officially confirmed as filming locations .
On January 1 , 2015 , The Rainbow Gypsy , a 15-year - old replica of an 1897 Scottish bawley , underwent an extensive refit at the Gold Coast , including a new bowsprit , and reconfigured decks and cabins , for filming as the Dying Gull .
Its captain and owner , Kit Woodward , was a rigger on the film .
Filming commenced on February 17 , 2015 .
Ship scenes were filmed in front of a giant outdoor greenscreen in Helensvale , while a film set in the form of a village was built in Maudsland .
Because the greenscreens ' height blocked the sunlight , containers with inflatable bluescreens mounted on top were added to the set to allow some light to enter .
While an initial draft of the script featured six ships , the end product had eleven vessels ; to cut costs , most of these were partial constructs later enhanced by computer graphics , with some built atop an hydraulic rig to mimic the movement of seafaring while on land .
The camera crew , led by director of photography Paul Cameron , also made extensive use of drones , to capture immersive views at sea without resorting to aerial footage or cranes .
Filming moved to Doug Jennings Park on The Spit from March 30 to June 15 for water - bound scenes .
However , due to extreme sea sickness among the cast and crew from the " big swells , " filming moved to Raby Bay for calmer waters .
Scenes were shot at Byron Bay on June 1 .
Locals made up more than 75 percent of the 850-plus crew then working on the film .
After much speculation about whether Orlando Bloom would return , Bloom arrived at the Gold Coast in late May to reprise his role as Will Turner .
Scenes featuring a skeleton of a sperm whale that had been constructed were shot at Hastings Point from June 21 to 23 .
A number of issues and controversies set back the film during its production .
The biosecurity laws in Australia posed problems regarding the capuchin monkeys that portray Hector Barbossa 's pet monkey Jack , because the animals are regarded as a category 1 pest and call for strict requirements and a 30-day quarantine .
Further controversy erupted from animal rights activist groups , who urged Federal Environment Minister Greg Hunt to reject the entry application , arguing that the long air - flight would affect their health , and that their performance was unnatural and would create demand for illegal wildlife trade .
One of the monkeys caused further disruption when it wandered off set at Movie World , and bit the ear of a make - up artist on another production .
Crew and cast members were forced to cover the camera lenses on all mobile phones with duct tape to prevent the film from being pirated before its release .
To prevent fans from interfering with the production , secret filming locations used the production name of " Herschel " to hide the fact it was the fifth Pirates of the Caribbean film .
Following the attempt of an armed man trying to bypass security , the already tight security was increased .
On March 10 , 2015 , Depp was injured off set and had to be flown to the United States for surgery .
Due to his absence , filming stalled completely and 200 crew members were forced to stand down for two weeks , after finishing all they could do without Depp .
Filming was set to resume " on or about April 20 , " and Depp returned to set on April 21 .
In June , Kaya Scodelario was injured on set along with a stuntman .
In early July , dismantling of the sets at The Spit had begun .
Most of the cast and crew had finished on July 8 , and a wrap party was held on July 11 .
Filming then moved to the Whitsundays for the final shots .
On July 21 , 2015 , Rønning announced that filming had wrapped after a 95-day shoot .
After nearly a year in post - production , reshoots and additional photography were conducted in Vancouver , Canada from March 24 to April 13 , 2016 , under the production title " Herschel Additional Photography . "
MUSIC Section::::Music .
This was the first film in the series that Hans Zimmer did not compose the music for .
Instead , the main composer is one of his protégés , Geoff Zanelli , who had worked on the previous four installments in the franchise .
Zanelli said that Zimmer " redefined the sound of the entire genre " and considered it a great accomplishment to have worked with him and Bruckheimer .
He used this experience with the franchise to build a new sound for the film .
He stated that " you do n't have to modernize the melodies , those are timeless , " citing one example of how he tried to make the sound more modern by featuring an electric cello to create a menacing leitmotif for Salazar .
This was also the first Pirates of the Caribbean score to feature mostly live percussion , as opposed to the programmed percussion in the prior scores .
As it took more than a year for the film to start production following Zanelli being hired , he accompanied the script 's evolution , and was familiar with the character arcs that he would need to translate in their theme songs .
Zanelli always started writing the music on the piano , namely a synthesized orchestra .
The film 's soundtrack was released on May 26 , 2017 .
POST - PRODUCTION Section::::Post - production .
Work on the film concluded on April 19 , 2017 .
Editing was a collaboration between Roger Barton and Leigh Folsom Boyd , with the latter detailing that " Roger started from the beginning of the film and I started from the end , and we kind of met in the middle . "
Boyd added that it was the longest post - production process
she was ever involved with , as Disney wanted to give " the support and leeway we needed to tell the story and allow for the complex visual effects to bake .
"
The editors worked closely with the previsualization team to , according to effects supervisor Gary Brozenich , " give meat to the bones of the plates that needed effects explanation as well as any new CG beats that would be added later . "
Along with the post - production team in Los Angeles , Brozenich had to split his time going to the UK and Montreal , to check on the eight companies handling the film 's 2,000 visual effects shots , with 150 of them consisting only of computer graphics .
The primary vendor was Brozenich 's own employer Moving Picture Company ( MPC ) .
Among MPC 's work were Salazar 's undead pirates , whose on - set footage was mostly replaced by to achieve missing body parts and floating hair and clothing .
Brozenich stated that what was kept of the original actors was " their run , gait and faces .
" To provide reference for the floating parts , which were meant to resemble a perpetual drowning state , a stuntman in full costume and wig was filmed underwater in a swimming pool performing various actions .
Atomic Fiction handled the scenes at St. Martin , turning the few blocks of buildings built on set into more than 600 CG buildings , surrounded by a jungle environment .
The work combined references from both the Caribbean and Thailand , and enhanced through CGI both the guillotine on which Jack Sparrow is nearly executed and the bank from the heist scene ; the bank was meant to look as if its foundations were dug through the ground instead of sliding on the surface .
Along with sea footage filmed in both the Australian sets and Key West , Florida , there was extensive usage of water simulations , with the artists using the Beaufort scale to ensure the waves and wind realistically matched .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Dead Men Tell No Tales had its world premiere at the Shanghai Disney Resort on May 11 , 2017 .
In several countries , including the United Kingdom , the film was released as Pirates of the Caribbean : Salazar 's Revenge , a decision that the directors were not informed about .
It was released at cinemas in Italy and Norway on May 24 , and in the United States , Canada , and China on May 26 .
It is the first Hollywood feature to be released in the United States for the new panorama - like ScreenX format , which played in two locations in the U.S.—CGV Buena Park and CGV Cinemas — both in Los Angeles , California .
Additionally , it played in 81 screens at select theaters in Korea , China , Thailand , Vietnam , Turkey and Indonesia .
The film also played in 4D on 373 4DX screens worldwide .
The film was released in IMAX in an expanded 1.9:1 aspect ratio .
It was Disney 's third wide release of the year , following Beauty and the Beast and Guardians of the Galaxy Vol .
2 .
Shortly before release , Dead Men Tell
No Tales was allegedly stolen by a group of piracy hackers , who demanded a large sum of money from Disney in order for them not to leak the unreleased film .
The company refused to do so and worked with the FBI in order to uncover the identity of the group .
Disney CEO Bob Iger reported that hackers did not steal their movie .
MARKETING Section::::Marketing .
A robust marketing effort helped promote Dead Men Tell No Tales .
The film was first showcased at the Disney D23 Expo 2015 , where Depp appeared in costume as Jack Sparrow and the film 's logo was revealed , with Orlando Bloom confirmed to be starring in the film .
Elizabeth Rudnick was self - confirmed to novelize the film , describing it the film as bringing back the series ' initial sensibility , while returning Jack Sparrow to " all of his swaggering glory .
"
A tie - in prequel expanding the backstory of the character Carina Smyth was also released , titled Pirates of the Caribbean :
Dead Men Tell No Tales – The Brightest Star in the North .
The film was showcased at the 2016 Walt Disney Content Showcase in South Africa , where concept art , story details and on - set images were previewed .
The first teaser trailer was released on October 2 , 2016 , during Fear the Walking Dead , and showcased Armando Salazar hunting for Jack Sparrow , who is shown on a wanted poster .
On January 27 , 2017 , Disney uploaded an eight - second motion poster to their official Instagram account , promoting the release of a television spot of the film during Super Bowl LI .
Disney then released a 30-second television teaser at Super Bowl LI , with an extended version released online set to Johnny Cash 's " Ai n't No Grave " .
The trailer was considered to be the " big " trailer of the event and was the most - viewed trailer of all the films advertised at the halftime show .
A new teaser poster was released with the trailer .
Both teasers received a highly positive reaction from audiences .
The official trailer was released on March 2 .
Another trailer was released on March 25 .
The first 30-second TV spot was released on March 31 .
On April 21 , at Disney Parks and on the four Disney cruise ships , Disney showcased a sneak peek of the film .
Disney premiered a 5-minute extended sequence of the film in front of the UK release of Marvel 's Guardians of the Galaxy Vol . 2 , on April 28 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Pirates of the Caribbean :
Dead Men Tell No Tales was released on digital download by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on September 19 , 2017 , and on Blu - ray , Ultra HD Blu - ray and DVD on October 3 .
It was the top home - media release in its first week , with the Blu - ray version accounting for 78 % of sales , and brought the previous four films back into the 25 best - sold Blu - rays .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Pirates of the Caribbean :
Dead Men Tell No Tales grossed $ 172.6 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 622.3 million in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 794.9 million , against an estimated production budget of $ 230 million .
It had a worldwide opening of $ 271.4 million from 55 markets , with $ 24 million coming from 1,088 IMAX screens .
The film 's six - day opening gross pushed the franchise gross past the $ 4 billion mark .
Despite being the lowest - grossing film of the series in the US by nearly $ 70 million , the film became the highest - grossing entry of the Pirates franchise internationally when going by modern foreign - exchange rates , passing On Stranger Tides , which grossed $ 593.4 million at current rates .
The largest - earning foreign markets were China ( $ 172.3 million ) , Japan ( $ 59.5 million ) , and Russia and the CIS ( $ 40.7 million ) , where it was the second - highest - grossing film behind Avatar .
Despite weak US totals , Deadline Hollywood noted the film would turn a net profit of around $ 280 million after factoring together all expenses and revenues .
NORTH AMERICA Section::::North America .
Dead Men Tell
No Tales debuted over the four - day Memorial Day opening weekend , being released in 4,276 theaters , of which over 3,100 were 3D , taking advantage of formats such as IMAX , D - Box and 4DX .
The film earned $ 23.4 million on its first day , including $ 5.5 million from previews .
It was the lowest opening day of the franchise .
It grossed $ 63 million over three days , and $ 78.5 million over four ( Friday – Monday ) , finishing first at the box office , ahead of Guardians of the Galaxy Vol .
2 and fellow newcomer Baywatch .
It was the second - smallest opening weekend of the franchise , only earning more than the first film , with each of the other installments earning at least $ 90 million .
Despite the film registering the highest test score in the series , the opening came in well below expectations of $ 80–115 million .
Analysts attributed the underperformance to negative reviews , franchise fatigue , and Johnny Depp 's diminishing returns and depreciating public image , amid his personal problems .
Still , it performed better than Disney 's previous Memorial Day releases ( , Tomorrowland and Alice Through the Looking Glass ) , and studio executives said they were pleased with the movie 's opening , which helped Disney push past $ 1 billion in the US .
The film fell by a total of 65 % in its second weekend , the worst of the series , grossing $ 22.1 million , and finishing in third place , after newcomers Wonder Woman ( $ 103.3 million ) and ( $ 23.9 million ) .
It remained in the top ten for four more weeks .
OUTSIDE NORTH
AMERICA Section::::Outside North America .
Internationally , where it is marketed as Salazar 's Revenge in most countries , the film was released day - and - date with its North American debut in 54 markets ( 91 % of its total marketplace , except Japan , where it debuted on July 1 ) .
Preliminary reports had the film opening to $ 150–175 million , but possibly overperforming depending on major markets , most notably China .
While its Chinese run benefited from the May 28–30 Dragon Boat Festival — a lucrative moviegoing period — and from International Children 's Day ( June 1 ) , the 2017 Manchester Arena bombing had a deteriorating effect on certain European markets over the film 's opening weekend .
From Wednesday to Friday , it registered an opening of $ 208.8 million .
Around $ 14 million of that came from IMAX screenings , the second - biggest international IMAX opening in May , after .
Similar to its US plunge , it earned $ 73.8 million in its second weekend , falling to second place , behind Wonder Woman .
It recorded the biggest opening day of the year in several markets , including Germany ( $ 3.6 million ) , Austria , France ( $ 2.3 million ) , Finland , Sweden , Belgium , Thailand ( $ 400,000 ) , Indonesia , Malaysia and the Netherlands ( $ 900,000 , the second - biggest Disney opening , behind ) .
Russia posted the biggest opening of all time with $ 18.4 million ( $ 18.6 million including previews ) .
In China , where the film had its global premiere , it earned $ 21.3 million on its opening day , the fourth - biggest Disney opening in the country .
It had an 87 % marketshare and had already surpassed the entire earnings of .
Earning a total of $ 67.9 million , it registered the third - highest three - day for any Disney title , and a much - higher opening than the US .
The film did extremely well in IMAX , earning $ 9 million from 401 screens from Friday to early Monday bookings .
The robust opening has been attributed to the Dragon Boat Festival , Depp 's star power , the ubiquity of the franchise , the impact of Shanghai Disneyland Park , and good word of mouth , with a score of 7.5/10 on reviews aggregator Douban and 8.7/10 on top mobile - ticketing platform Weying .
The film 's final release market was Japan ( July 1 ) , where it opened at number one , achieving the highest - grossing opening for a Western film of the year , earning $ 9.25 million over the July 1–2 weekend .
It retained the box office lead for one more week , and was the highest - grossing foreign film in the following weekend .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Dead Men Tell No Tales received mixed reviews from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 29 % based on 259 reviews , and an average rating of 4.7/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Pirates of the Caribbean : Dead Men Tell No Tales proves that neither a change in directors nor an undead Javier Bardem is enough to drain this sinking franchise 's murky bilge . "
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 39 out of 100 , based on 45 critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A− " on an A+ to F scale , while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave it an 82 % overall positive score .
Mike Ryan of Uproxx criticized what he termed as a convoluted plot and overabundance of characters , resulting in a film that was " practically incoherent . "
Writing for Rolling Stone , Peter Travers called the film " bloated , boring , repetitive and draining " and gave it one star out of four .
Ignatiy Vishnevetsky of The A.V. Club wrote that the film echoes the first three of the franchise , " in which Johnny Depp 's louche and campy Jack Sparrow played second banana to an insipid love story ...
the two romantic leads [ ... ] succeed only in making the shortest movie in the series seem just as long as the rest . "
A. O. Scott of The New York Times said of the film , " Its pleasures are so meager , its delight in its own inventions so forced and false , that it becomes almost the perfect opposite of entertainment . "
Michael O'Sullivan of The Washington Post remarked that the film was " loud , overstimulating and hard to take in all in one sitting . "
Mick LaSalle of San Francisco Chronicle found the film to be " a jumble of half - baked impulses " that had been forced into a played - out franchise .
Richard Roeper of Chicago Sun - Times gave the film 3 out of 4 stars , saying : " Dead Men works well enough as a stand - alone , swashbuckling comedic spectacle , thanks to the terrific performances , some ingenious practical effects , impressive CGI and a steady diet of PG-13 dialogue peppered with not particularly sophisticated but ( I have to admit ) fairly funny sexual innuendo . "
Pete Hammond of Deadline Hollywood praised the film , calling it " the most entertaining installment , " and giving credit to Rønning and Sandberg for creating a " rollicking good time " .
He praised the visual effects , particularly Salazar and his crew , arguing that the film should be in line to receive an Academy Award for Visual Effects .
He also gave high praise to Bardem for being able to create such a " fully dimensional villain " under the layers of make - up and CGI , and Depp for keeping the film and franchise going .
Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a ' B ' , praising the fun nature of the film and its visuals and calling it " gorgeously detailed swashbuckling nonsense , " but wished that the script had taken more risks instead of following the formula used in previous films .
Ashley Esqueda of CNET gave the film a positive review , arguing that it brought the franchise back to what made its first two installments so fun , and praised Depp 's performance as being " delightful as ever . "
Brian Truitt of USA Today gave the film 3 out of 4 stars , saying " What was once a past - its - prime franchise seems to have found new life . "
Mark Hughes of Forbes opined " Dead Men Tell
No Tales is n't as good as the first three films , but it 's better than the fourth , " adding " it has mostly good performances , and a couple of great ones .
It has fantastic visual effects , lots of humor that works , a lighthearted feel and sense of fun , and many terrific action set pieces . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
bgcolor="#CCCCCC "
align="center
" ! Award ! Category !
Recipients and nominees !
Outcome
Choice Action Movie SEQUEL
Section::::Sequel .
On March 4 , 2017 , director Joachim Rønning stated that Dead Men was only the beginning of the final adventure , implying that it would not be the last film of the franchise , and that a sixth film could be released .
The post - credits scene of Dead Men shows Will Turner , Elizabeth Swann , and Davy Jones .
In September 2017 , producer Jerry Bruckheimer indicated that another Pirates sequel is still possible if Dead Men Tell No Tales does well in its home release .
In October 2017 , the sixth film was confirmed and Kaya Scodelario said that she was contracted to return .
Shortly after , it was announced that Rønning is being eyed to return to direct the sequel .
As of August 2018 , the sixth film is still in development .
SEE ALSO
* De - aging in film NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS