BOARDWALK EMPIRE ( SEASON 5 )
The fifth and final season of the HBO television series Boardwalk Empire premiered on September 7 , 2014 , and concluded on October 26 , 2014 , consisting of 8 episodes .
The series was created by Terence Winter and based on the book Boardwalk Empire : The Birth , High Times and Corruption of Atlantic City by Nelson Johnson .
Set in Atlantic City , New Jersey , during the Prohibition era , the series stars Steve Buscemi as Enoch " Nucky " Thompson ( based loosely on the historical Enoch " Nucky " Johnson ) , a political figure who rose to prominence and controlled Atlantic City , New Jersey , during the Prohibition period of the 1920s and early 1930s .
The fifth season takes place between April and October 1931 , seven years after the previous season , during the Great Depression , with flashbacks to 1884 and 1897 detailing Nucky 's childhood and young adulthood .
The fifth season was released on DVD and Blu - ray in region 1 on January 13 , 2015 .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
HBO renewed Boardwalk Empire for a fifth season on September 26 , 2013 , and announced on January 9 , 2014 , that it would be the final season .
The New York budget for the show 's final season was $ 87.2 million .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN CAST Section::::Cast and characters .
Section::::Main cast .
Departing the main cast from the previous season are Anthony Laciura , Jack Huston , Ron Livingston and Michael Stuhlbarg .
Ben Rosenfield was promoted to main cast after recurring in the previous season .
* Steve Buscemi as Enoch " Nucky " Thompson * Kelly Macdonald as Margaret Thompson * Michael Shannon as Nelson Van Alden / George Mueller
* Shea Whigham as Elias " Eli " Thompson * Stephen Graham as Al Capone
* Vincent Piazza as Charlie Luciano
* Michael Kenneth Williams as Albert " Chalky "
White * Paul Sparks as Mickey Doyle
* Jeffrey Wright as Dr. Valentin Narcisse
* Ben Rosenfield as Willie Thompson * Gretchen Mol as Gillian Darmody
RECURRING CAST
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The fifth season of Boardwalk Empire received positive reviews from critics .
On the review aggregator website Metacritic , the fifth season scored 83 out of 100 based on 12 reviews , indicating " universal acclaim " .
For the 67th Writers Guild of America Awards , the series received two nominations for Best Episodic Drama — Howard Korder for " Devil You Know " , and Riccardo DiLoreto , Cristine Chambers and Howard Korder for " Friendless Child " .
For the 21st Screen Actors Guild Awards , the cast was nominated for Best Drama Ensemble , Steve Buscemi was nominated for Best Drama Actor , and the series was nominated for Best Stunt Team .
For the 67th Primetime Emmy Awards , Tim Van Patten was nominated for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series for " Eldorado " .
For the 67th Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards , the series received nine nominations , and won for Outstanding Cinematography for a Single - Camera Series and Outstanding Production Design for a Narrative Period Program ( One Hour or More ) .
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
The season premiered on OSN First HD in the Middle East on September 8 , 2014 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS