WHEN CALLS THE HEART
When Calls the Heart is a Canadian - American television drama series , inspired by Janette Oke 's book of the same name from her Canadian West series , and developed by
Michael Landon Jr. The series began airing on the Hallmark Channel in the United States on January 11 , 2014 , and on April 16 , 2014 on Super Channel in Canada .
The series originally debuted as a two - hour television movie pilot in October 2013 , starring Maggie Grace as young teacher Elizabeth Thatcher and Stephen Amell as North West Mounted Police officer Wynn Delaney .
In the television series Erin Krakow is cast as her niece , whose name is also Elizabeth Thatcher ( played by Poppy Drayton in the movie ) , and Daniel Lissing plays a Mountie named Jack Thornton , with Lori Loughlin reprising her role as coal mine widow Abigail Stanton .
On April 24 , 2017 , Krakow announced via the Hallmark Channel website that the show would return for a fifth season , which premiered with a two - hour Christmas special broadcast as part of Hallmark 's Countdown to Christmas event and resumed in February 2018 , ending in April .
On March 21 , 2018 , Hallmark renewed the series for a sixth season .
A spin off of the show named When Hope Calls was announced at Hallmark 's Television Critics Association summer press tour on July 26 , 2018 .
When Hope Calls is expected to debut in 2019 on Hallmark Movies Now streaming service .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
When Calls the Heart tells the story of Elizabeth Thatcher ( Erin Krakow ) , a young teacher accustomed to her high - society life .
She receives her first classroom assignment in Coal Valley , a small coal - mining town in Western Canada which is located just south of Robb , Alberta .
There , life is simple — but often fraught with challenges .
Elizabeth charms most everyone in Coal Valley , except Royal North West
Mounted Police Constable Jack Thornton ( Daniel Lissing ) .
He believes Thatcher 's wealthy father has doomed the lawman 's career by insisting he be assigned in town to protect the shipping magnate 's daughter .
The town of Coal Valley was renamed Hope Valley in Episode 1 , Season 2 after the coal mine was closed .
Living in this 1910 coal town , Elizabeth must learn the ways of the Canadian frontier movement if she wishes to thrive in the rural west on her own .
Lori Loughlin portrays Abigail Stanton , whose husband , the foreman of the mine , and her only son — along with 45 other miners — have recently been killed in an explosion , which turns out to have been a tragic accident waiting to happen — a result of the mining - company site manager 's irresponsible management and lack of due care in his management of the mine .
The newly widowed women find their faith tested when they must go to work in the mine to keep a roof over their heads , food on the table , and compile a wage for the town 's teacher .
EPISODES CAST MAIN * Erin Krakow as Elizabeth Thatcher Thornton
* Daniel Lissing as Jack Thornton ( Seasons 1–5 )
* Lori Loughlin as Abigail Stanton * Jack Wagner as Bill Avery * Martin Cummins as Henry Gowen
* Pascale Hutton as Rosemary LeVeaux Coulter
* Kavan Smith as Leland Coulter RECURRING
* Paul Greene as Carson Shepherd * Clayton Chitty as Kevin Townsend
* Andrea Brooks as Faith Carter
* Eva Bourne as Clara Weller Stanton
* Aren Buchholz as Jesse Flynn
* Carter Ryan Evancic as Cody Hastings
* Loretta Walsh as Florence Blakeley * Erica Carroll as Dottie Ramsey * Johannah Newmarch as Molly Sullivan * Mark Humphrey as Frank Hogan * Chelah Horsdal as Cat Montgomery
* Mitchell Kummen as Gabe Montgomery
* Gracyn Shinyei as Emily Montgomery * Logan Williams as Miles Montgomery
* Ben Rosenbaum as Mike Hickam
* Ava Grace Cooper as Opal
* Charlotte Hegele as Julie Thatcher
* Max Lloyd - Jones as Tom Thornton * Brooke Shields as Charlotte Thornton
* Ali Skovbye as Becky Hastings
* Garwin Sanford as William Thatcher
* Lynda Boyd as Grace Thatcher
* Devon Weigel as Viola Thatcher * Marcus Rosner as Charles Kensington * Josie Bissett as AJ Foster
* Steve Bacic as Charles Spurlock * Kristina Wagner as Nora Avery * Mamie Laverock as Rosaleen Sullivan * Adrian Hough as Reverend Anderson
* Will Verchere - Gopaulsingh as Caleb Dunbar * Laura Bertram as Mary Dunbar
* Derek Hamilton as Dewitt Graves * Niall Matter as Shane Cantrell ( season 4 )
* Spencer Drever as Cyrus Rivera ( season 4 ) CHARACTERS * Elizabeth Thatcher Thornton is an independent , strong - minded , passionate and dedicated young teacher from the city .
The middle daughter of William and Grace Thatcher , Elizabeth has two sisters , older sister Viola and younger sister Julie .
Elizabeth was in
her mid-20 's when she found herself in Coal Valley , a small community on the Canadian frontier in need of a teacher , and quickly discovers it is not an easy place to live , lacking the creature comforts and luxuries of her privileged life with her family .
She soon meets the newly appointed and charismatic Mountie Jack Thornton and develops an immediate dislike for him .
However , over time they become good friends , and develop an obvious attraction to one another .
In the season 1 finale , " Prelude to a Kiss " ( also titled as " Final Adieu " ) , after overcoming many obstacles throughout the season , Jack tells Elizabeth
" You 're the one , you 're the only one " and they share a kiss .
Throughout season 2 , Elizabeth 's feelings for Jack are high at times as well as low .
Finally , in the season 2 finale , she admits that his job as a Mountie scares her .
After being comforted both admitting that they love each other , Jack and Elizabeth kiss .
Season 3 continues the love story of Jack and Elizabeth , all leading up to Jack 's marriage proposal in season 4
" My Heart Will Go On .
"
The two we d in season 5 's
" My Heart Is Yours .
"
Just days into their marriage , Jack is given a new assignment and leaves .
He is killed ( offscreen ) in season 5 's " In My Dreams .
" In the season 5 finale , " Close to My Heart , " Elizabeth finds out she is pregnant with Jack 's baby .
* Jack Thornton is a laid back country boy .
Jack is the son of Mountie Thomas Thornton and his wife Charlotte Thornton .
Jack has a younger brother , Tom ( named after his father ) .
As a Mountie and a man of stout character and integrity , he often finds himself protecting and saving people .
In season 1 's " A Telling Silence , " Jack finds a basset hound whom he names Rip ( after Rip Van Winkle ) and takes home with him .
A source of comfort and companion in the small town , Jack often goes to Rip when times in his life are difficult .
In season 2 's " With All My Heart , " Rip , who 's afraid of thunder , hides in the mine shafts during a storm .
Jack and Elizabeth search for him ; in their search , their relationship grows stronger .
Upon his first meeting of Elizabeth , Jack developed an instant dislike and it appeared she irritated him .
However , he grew to like and then fall madly and completely in love with her over time .
In " Rules of Engagement " ( S.1 ) , it is revealed that Jack was briefly engaged to Rosemary LeVeaux when she comes looking for him .
However , they have both changed and realize that they can not have a relationship as they once did ever again .
In " Prelude to a Kiss " ( S.1 ) , Jack found out that Elizabeth may be leaving Coal Valley .
Taking her on a walk and giving her a framed picture of them that he had sketched , he asks her not to leave Coal Valley and tells her , " You 're the one , you 're the only one . "
She replied that she was " not going anywhere "
, Coal Valley was where she belonged before they share a kiss .
In season 2 , Elizabeth and Jack share a hot - and - cold relationship until the finale , " With All My Heart .
" They both admit that they love each other and share another kiss .
Jack 's brother , Tom , is introduced season 2 's " Trials of the Heart , " and their rocky relationship continues until " Coming Together , Coming Apart . "
Jack gently reminds his younger brother how their father was so proud of him , but he would n't be proud of the way he was currently living .
Both in tears , Jack tells his younger brother that he believes in him and that he can turn his life around .
More recently , Jack has become good friends with the sawmill operator , Lee Coulter .
In season 3 , Jack begins the new year knowing that Elizabeth only has eyes for him and that her relationship with Charles is over for good .
In " Hearts In Question , " Jack 's mother Charlotte shows up unexpectedly .
She meets Elizabeth and is suspicious of her , but through staying her sees Elizabeth for who she really is : a trustworthy , dedicated teacher .
In the season finale , " Prayers From The Heart , " Jack is injured in a flood .
But he miraculously recovers in time to serve as Lee 's best man at his wedding .
Jack proposes to Elizabeth in season 4 's "
My Heart Will Go On , " the night before he leaves for a new Mountie assignment .
In season 5 's " My Heart Is Yours , " Jack and Elizabeth finally we d .
Days into their new marriage , Jack receives a new assignment and leaves .
He is killed ( offscreen ) in season 5 's " In My Dreams , " but his legacy will live on in his wife and their unborn child .
* Abigail Stanton is a Coal Valley woman whose husband and son died in the mining accident .
Abigail is a very kind woman , and she stands strongly for the things she believes in .
She is one of the first women to welcome Elizabeth and the two women quickly become friends .
When Elizabeth accidentally burns down the little teacherage , Abigail gladly welcomes her into her home to live .
After being complimented on her cooking , Abigail decides to open a cafe in Coal Valley .
Together , Abigail and Elizabeth move into the rooms above the cafe .
At the end of season 1 , Abigail enjoys the company of Bill Avery , a Mountie , serving as a Forensic Investigator and friend of Jack Thornton 's .
In season 2 , Abigail takes in her daughter - in - law , Clara , the wife of her late son Peter whom Abigail sees as the daughter she never had .
With Bill 's past being revealed , Abigail ends their friendship and spends more time with the new pastor , Frank Hogan .
Also , she is a strong independent woman that is set on doing the things that are right and tries to help Elizabeth .
In season 3 , Abigail takes in two orphans , Becky Hastings , and her younger brother Cody .
In season 4 's " Heart of A Fighter , " Abigail legally adopts Becky and Cody .
Abigail serves as one of Elizabeth 's matrons of honor in season 5 's "
My Heart Is Yours . "
* Bill Avery is a mysterious , quiet man .
He first appears in season 1 's " Rules of Engagement , " in order to help Jack expose Mr. Gowen 's wrongdoings .
Bill is immediately attracted to widow Abigail Stanton .
Things are going well until Abigail discovers a picture of Bill 's family and his wedding ring .
He later tells her that his son died , as well as his wife .
However , his wife , Nora , comes to confront him in season 2 's " Heart 's Desire . "
* Henry Gowen is a cold , cynical man who formerly owned the coal mine .
After the mine was shut down , Henry became the mayor of Hope Valley and still creates a cold , cynical presence whenever people are around him .
Henry is highly disliked and feared in the town .
He frequently uses bribery to get what he wants , which is never for the good of the town .
In season 5 , however , Henry seems to be turning into a new man , coming to the aid of the town often and actually helping Bill catch a criminal red - handed in season 5 's " In My Dreams . "
* Rosemary " Rosie " LeVeaux Coulter is a flamboyant , enthusiastic actress from New York .
She was briefly engaged to Jack Thornton , but they both realized that it would n't work out .
Rosie immediately disliked Elizabeth and viewed her as " the competition , " but eventually came to really care about Elizabeth , even if she has a hard time showing it .
At the beginning of season 2 , Rosemary began working at the cafe with Abigail and the two quickly became friends .
Spending time with Abigail helped tone down some of Rosemary 's enthusiasm and made her a more likable person .
Rosemary even came to like Elizabeth , even if only on an acquaintance level .
Truthfully , she cares about everyone in Hope Valley , especially Lee , with whom she shares an mutual attraction .
When Rosie is not spending time with Lee , talking to Abigail , or dreaming about the glamorous life of an actress , she can often be found somewhere writing her weekly advice column for Hope Valley 's newspaper !
In season 3 , Rosemary 's friendship with Elizabeth deepened .
Instead of viewing her as an adversary , she finds a friend in Elizabeth .
Throughout season 3 , Rosemary 's relationship with Lee becomes more romantic .
In " Heart Of A Hero , " seeing that Lee needs to spend more time at the sawmill to help the new settlers find jobs , Rosemary tells Lee that the theater does n't have to be built .
He insists , but she says how important his job is .
He smiles and tells her he will one day build her theatre , telling her that she is " the best part of his life .
"
The couple shares in their first kiss .
In " A Gentle Heart , " Lee is injured .
Thinking he is asleep , Rosemary pours out her heart to him , telling how much she loves him .
In " Heartbreak , " Rosemary is offered a job in Hollywood filming .
This has always been Rosemary 's dream , to be an actress .
Lee unselfishly tells her to do whatever she feels best , but the thought of her leaving Hope Valley hurts him .
Rosemary considers her options and realizes that her place is in Hope Valley , with Lee .
Lee then tells her that he has another " role " that he thinks would be perfect for her and proposes marriage .
She happily accepts .
In " Hearts In Question , " Rosemary enthusiastically plans for their wedding .
The couple weds in the season 3 finale " Prayers From The Heart , " with Elizabeth and Abigail as her maids of honor .
Rosemary is one of Elizabeth 's matrons of honor in season 5 's "
My Heart Is Yours . "
* Lee Coulter is a kind , laid - back , patient man who opens a sawmill in Hope Valley .
When timber becomes Coal Valley 's major source of natural resources , the town is renamed Hope Valley .
He shares a mutual attraction to Rosemary and proves to be one of the few people who can outwit her .
When she declines his romantic intentions , Lee recruits his friend , Molly Sullivan , to make Rosemary jealous ; the ploy succeeds and Rosemary accepts his suit , appreciating Lee 's good qualities .
Despite her dramatic and occasionally prickly personality , Lee 's compassion and patience never fails with her .
With Rosemary 's help , Lee beat Mr. Gowen at his own game in " Heart and Home .
" When not at work , Lee enjoys being with friends , including Jack Thornton , who shares Lee 's simple and laid back outlook , allowing the men to discuss their lives and exchange romantic advice .
In season 3 , Lee 's mill is unfortunately sabotaged by a man inside .
Through Bill and Jack 's investigation , they find the culprit .
In season 3 's " Heart Of A Hero , " Rosemary unselfishly gives up the theater that Lee promised to build her .
Lee promises that one day , he will build her the theater at a time when he is n't so involved with the sawmill and finding people jobs .
In " A Gentle Heart , " Lee is injured .
Thinking Lee is asleep , Rosemary pours out her heart to Lee , telling him how afraid she was when she heard he had been injured .
He however hears each and every word .
She told him how much she loves him and to never leave her .
In the episode " Heartbreak , " Lee thinks Rosemary may leave Hope Valley when she is offered a movie job in Hollywood .
When she gives up the movie , seeing her future in Hope Valley with him , he asks her to marry him .
The couple weds in the season 3 finale , " Prayers From The Heart .
" Jack serves the role of Lee 's best man .
Lee returns the honor for Jack in season 5 's " My Heart Is Yours .
"
In season 4 's " Heart of A Fighter , " we learn that Lee lost his brother Patrick at a young age .
* Julie Thatcher is Elizabeth 's hopeless romantic younger sister .
She often gets herself into sticky situations by falling head over heels for men who are n't quite what they seem .
In season 2 she gets involved with Jack 's brother Tom , which causes trouble with her family and for Jack and Elizabeth 's relationship .
* Cat Montgomery is a kind , encouraging woman in Coal Valley .
She is a widow and mother of three : Gabe , Miles , and Emily .
Cat was one of the first mothers to show kindness to Elizabeth when she first came .
She desperately wants her children to remember the good memories of their father as seen by her self - sacrificing acts in " Secrets and Lies . "
Possessing a great sense of teamwork and encouragement , Cat supports the women of Coal Valley while working in the mines in " Cease and Desist .
" She is good friends with Elizabeth and Abigail .
In " These Games , " she also helps Jack catch a thief .
* Florence Blakeley is a feisty gossip in Hope Valley .
She often has a pessimistic perspective and always seems to find the negative , even in a very positive situation .
In " Heart and Home , " Abigail told Florence what she really thought about her , which causes Florence to rein in her negativity somewhat , though she remains fairly outspoken .
While not always likable , Florence adds spice to life in Hope Valley .
*
Molly Sullivan is a friend of Lee Coulter and Elizabeth Thatcher .
Molly 's husband was killed in the mine disaster .
She has a daughter Rosaleen .
In season 1 's " A Telling Silence , " Rosaleen has trouble in school because she misses her father so much .
When she runs away , Elizabeth finds her in the mine , feeling guilty that she did n't bring her father his lunch the day of the disaster because she wanted to play with a friend instead .
She fears her mother will blame her , but Elizabeth convinces her that Molly will " say that she loves her more than life itself .
" Molly is reunited with her daughter , to the joy of the town 's people .
In season 2 's " With All My Heart , " Lee feels it 's time to " play hard to get " with Rosemary , so he enlists help from Molly .
She pretends to be interested in him romantically .
This ploy works and Rosemary admits that she does in fact like him .
Molly is a kind woman and was among the first to welcome Elizabeth to town .
*
Clara Stanton is the wife of Abigail 's late son Peter , and is a sweet , quiet , and sensitive young woman .
Abigail never knew she had a daughter - in - law until season 2 's " Trials of the Heart ; " with Peter having married Clara only three days before he was killed .
In " Heart 's Desire , " Abigail invites Clara to come live with her in Hope Valley , an offer that Clara accepts .
* Charles Kensington III is an old friend of Elizabeth with whom she reconnects while in Hamilton .
He is interested in her , though her feelings for Jack get in the way of their relationship .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The series , originally planned to be filmed in Colorado , is filmed south of Vancouver , British Columbia , on a farm surrounded by vineyards .
The fictional frontier town of Coal Valley was erected in late 2013 .
Some of the set trimmings and a stage coach came from the Hell on Wheels set .
The Thatcher home is the University Women 's Club of Vancouver .
The series was renewed for a second season , which aired from April 25 to June 13 , 2015 .
Hallmark Channel announced in July 2015 that the series had been renewed for a third season , which aired from February 21 to April 10 , 2016 , with a sneak peek airing during the 2015 Christmas season .
In mid-2016 , it was announced that Season 4 would premiere on the Hallmark Channel Christmas Day with a two - hour special .
On April 11 , 2016 , Lissing and Krakow announced via the series ' Facebook page that Hallmark Channel had renewed the series for a fourth season , which aired from February 19 to April 23 , 2017 .
Filming for season five began in Vancouver on August 22 , 2017 , and ended on December 21 , 2017 .
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
The first season of the series was subsequently picked up by CBC Television for rebroadcast as a summer series in 2015 .
The network has since aired all five seasons .
The series became available internationally on Netflix in August 2017 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website