THE FLASH ( 2014 TV SERIES )
The Flash is an American superhero television series developed by Greg Berlanti , Andrew Kreisberg , and Geoff Johns , airing on The CW .
It is based on the DC Comics character Barry Allen / Flash , a costumed superhero crime - fighter with the power to move at superhuman speeds .
It is a spin - off from Arrow , existing in the same fictional universe .
The series follows Allen , portrayed by Grant Gustin , a crime scene investigator who gains super - human speed , which he uses to fight criminals , including others who have also gained superhuman abilities .
Initially envisioned as a backdoor pilot , the positive reception Gustin received during two appearances as Barry on Arrow led to executives choosing to develop a full pilot to make use of a larger budget and help flesh out Barry 's world in more detail .
Colleen Atwood , costume designer for Arrow , was brought in to design the Flash 's suit .
The creative team wanted to make sure that the Flash would resemble his comic book counterpart , and not simply be a poor imitation .
The series is primarily filmed in Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada .
The Flash premiered in North America on October 7 , 2014 , where the pilot became the second - most watched premiere in the history of The CW , after The Vampire Diaries in 2009 .
It has been well received by critics and audiences , and won the People 's Choice Award for " Favorite New TV Drama " in 2014 .
The series , together with Arrow , has spun characters out to their own show , Legends of Tomorrow , which premiered on January 21 , 2016 .
On April 2 , 2018 , The CW renewed the series for a fifth season , which premiered on October 9 , 2018 .
SERIES OVERVIEW
Section::::Series overview .
In season one , after witnessing his mother 's supernatural murder , Barry Allen is taken in by Detective Joe West and his family .
Barry becomes a brilliant but socially awkward crime scene investigator for the Central City Police Department .
A particle accelerator malfunctions , bathing the city center with a radiation during a thunderstorm , and Barry is struck by lightning .
Awakening after a coma , he discovers he can move at superhuman speeds .
Harrison Wells , the accelerator 's designer , describes Barry 's nature as " metahuman " .
Barry vows to use his gifts to protect Central City .
As the Flash , Barry also pursues his mother 's murderer , the Reverse - Flash .
In season two , after a singularity event occurs , the Flash is recognized as Central City 's hero .
However , the event brings a new threat from a parallel earth : Zoom , a demonic speedster who seeks to eliminate all speedsters throughout the multiverse .
Harrison Wells ' parallel universe counterpart nicknamed " Harry " , and his daughter Jesse , work to help Barry stop Zoom and explore the multiverse .
Joe and his daughter , Iris , struggle with the arrival of Iris 's brother Wally West .
After Zoom kills Barry 's father , and following Zoom 's defeat , Barry travels back in time to save his mother 's life .
In season three , by changing his past , Barry creates the alternate timeline " Flashpoint " .
Though he is somewhat able to restore the timeline , this creates new threats , including the emergence of Savitar , a god - like speedster with a grudge against Barry .
After Harry and Jesse return to Earth-2 , another Wells doppelgänger is recruited : the novelist " H.R. " Wells .
Both Wally and Caitlin Snow begin to manifest metahuman abilities ; Wally suits up as the speedster Kid Flash , while Caitlin is forced to suppress her ice - powers to prevent Killer Frost from emerging .
When Barry accidentally travels to the future and sees Iris killed by Savitar , he becomes desperate to change the future to prevent that from happening .
After saving Iris and defeating Savitar , Barry takes his place in the Speed Force in order to repent for his creation of Flashpoint .
In season four , following Barry 's departure , Wally and Cisco have barely been able to protect Central City .
When a new foe defeats them easily , requesting a battle against the Flash , the team decides to bring Barry back .
While they manage to do so , Barry 's return releases dark matter , turning a dozen people on a city bus into metahumans .
One of these metas is private detective Ralph Dibny , who joins the Flash 's team .
The team later encounters Clifford DeVoe , an adversary with the fastest mind alive , who has orchestrated Barry 's return from the Speed Force as well as the creation of the bus metas .
Harry Wells , with his parallel universe counterparts , establish an alliance coined the Council of Wells to assist Team Flash in stopping DeVoe .
Following the Thinker 's defeat , the team is approached by Barry and Iris ' daughter from the future , Nora West - Allen , who claims to have made " a big , big mistake " .
In season five , Barry is approached by his daughter , Nora West - Allen , who has arrived from the future to spend time with him .
However , the team quickly discovers that Nora 's presence not only altered the timeline , but unleashed a new threat in the form of Cicada , a serial killer bent on killing metahumans .
In addition , they discover that meta - technology was created following their battle with the Thinker , meaning anyone wielding meta - tech can utilize the power of a metahuman .
The Council of Wells sends one of their doppelgängers , detective Sherloque Wells , to aid Team Flash in countering these crises .
CAST AND CHARACTERS
* Grant Gustin as Barry Allen /
The Flash :
* Candice Patton as Iris West : The daughter of Joe West , sister to Wally West , and Barry Allen 's wife , getting engaged in " Duet " and marrying during the Crisis on Earth - X event .
She works at Central City Picture News as a journalist .
* Danielle Panabaker as Caitlin Snow / Killer Frost :
* Rick Cosnett as Eddie Thawne : A recent transfer to the Central City Police Department , Eddie 's past is a mystery and he harbored a dark secret .
He was partner to Detective Joe West and Iris West 's love interest .
Cosnett left the series after the first season , following his character 's sacrifice to wipe Eobard Thawne , his distant descendant , from history .
* Carlos Valdes as Cisco Ramon / Vibe : A mechanical engineering genius , Cisco is the youngest member of the team of scientists at S.T.A.R. Labs and a metahuman .
* Tom Cavanagh as Harrison Wells :
* Jesse L. Martin as Joe West : A police detective who acts as a surrogate father to Barry , after his mother 's death and father 's imprisonment , and who is the father of Iris and Wally .
He also now has a daughter with his fiancée , district attorney Cecille Horton , named Jenna West .
Martin later taking a medical leave of absence from the show during season five after suffering a back injury .
* Keiynan Lonsdale as Wally West / Kid Flash :
* Neil Sandilands as Clifford DeVoe /
The Thinker : A college professor and metahuman with a genius - level intellect , who looks to fix all that he deems wrong with humanity .
* Hartley Sawyer as Ralph Dibny / Elongated Man : A private investigator , former corrupt CCPD cop , and metahuman with superpowers including body elasticity and malleablility who becomes a member of Team Flash .
* Danielle Nicolet as Cecile Horton : A district attorney who becomes Joe West 's girlfriend and the mother of their daughter Jenna West .
While pregnant , she experiences temporary telepathic metahuman superpowers .
* Jessica Parker Kennedy as Nora West - Allen / XS : Barry and Iris ' speedster daughter from the future .
* Chris Klein as Orlin Dwyer / Cicada : A meta - human serial killer , who is determined to wipe out all meta - humans .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
On July 30 , 2013 , it was announced that Arrow co - creators Greg Berlanti and Andrew Kreisberg , Arrow pilot director David Nutter , and DC Comics CCO Geoff Johns would develop a television series based on the Flash for The CW , and it would detail Barry Allen 's origin .
Kreisberg revealed after the announcement that Allen would first appear as a recurring character on Arrow in three episodes of season two — all written by Berlanti , Kreisberg and Johns — and the last of the episodes would act as a backdoor pilot for the new show .
Kreisberg added that Allen would be a forensic scientist and the introduction of his superpowers , as well as the reactions to this , will be very human and grounded .
Johns stated that the character of the Flash in the show would resemble his comic book counterpart , complete with his trademark red costume , and not be a poor imitation .
Kreisberg elaborated : " No sweat suits or strange code names ; he will be The Flash . "
While researching the best way to depict the Flash 's lightning speed , Johns stated it would not just be the standard " blurring around " .
Barry ultimately appeared twice in Arrow second season , with the planned backdoor pilot cancelled in favor of a traditional pilot by The CW executives , who had been impressed by early cuts of Barry 's first two episodes on Arrow .
This allowed the creative team to flesh out Barry 's story and his world on a bigger budget , as opposed to a backdoor pilot 's constraint of incorporating characters from the parent show .
The pilot was officially ordered on January 29 , 2014 , and was written by Berlanti , Kreisberg , and Johns , and directed by Nutter .
On May 8 , 2014 , The Flash was officially picked up as a series , with an initial order of 13 episodes .
Three more scripts were ordered in September 2014 following a positive response to newly completed episodes by executives , while a back ten was ordered the next month for a full 23-episode season .
With the commencement of production on the series ' second season , former Arrow and Ugly Betty writer Gabrielle Stanton was promoted to executive producer and showrunner ; after having served as consulting producer and writer on the first season 's finale " Fast Enough " .
However , it was later reported that Kreisberg would be returning to sole showrunner duties at an unspecified time .
That time was later proved to be at the start of 2016 , " Potential Energy " , when Stanton was no longer credited as being involved with the show .
In May 2017 , it was reported that Aaron Helbing would be departing the series .
Helbing had served as a writer since the first season , and as co - showrunner , along with his brother Todd and Kreisberg , since the second .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
The costume was designed by Colleen Atwood , who also designed the costumes for Arrow .
It features a burgundy color scheme , a masked helmet , and gold accents throughout , and went through multiple adjustments from the moment it was placed in computer renderings to the day of filming the pilot .
Primarily made of leather , the suit contains areas with a stretchable material to allow Gustin room to bend .
According to Atwood " It was all about a costume that could sell speed , Grant [ Gustin ] was continually moving in the suit , so it had to be designed to make that all happen visually and functionally .
" It initially took Gustin approximately 40 minutes to get into his costume , as the first cowl was prosthetic and had to be zipped and glued to his face .
This was cut down to approximately 15 minutes by episode eight , when designers were able to develop a new cowl that easily slid over Gustin 's face and locked into place .
Maya Mani replaced Atwood as the costume designer for the second season and made slight changes to the Flash costume , such as changing the color of his crest from yellow to white , being faithful to the Flash costume from the comics .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Production on the pilot began in March 2014 , with filming taking place in Vancouver , British Columbia ; additional filming for the series takes place in Portland , Oregon .
On how action sequences are shot for the series , compared to Arrow , Gustin said , " When [ Arrow ] shoot[s ] action sequences , pretty much what you see is what you get
and they 're really doing everything .
We do a lot of plate shots that are empty shots of the area we 're going to be in
and then they 're putting us in later in post .
I do a lot of the fighting .
I do n't have to do it full speed and then they ramp it up and a lot of people have to freeze
and I keep moving .
Then I have to clear frame and step back into frame .
It 's really tedious stuff that we have to do .
On theirs , they learn fight choreography
and they shoot it from the perfect angles and what you see is what you get .
" Production on the third season began in early July 2016 . MUSIC Section::::Music .
Arrow composer Blake Neely is the primary composer of the series , and was first hired in April 2014 to score the pilot .
He had previously composed a theme for Barry Allen which was featured in Arrows season two episodes " The Scientist " and " Three Ghosts " .
The theme was titled " The Scientist " when it was released on the Arrow :
Season 2 soundtrack .
According to Neely , " It had to be different [ from Arrow ] ...
but it also could n't be so different that it could n't fit in the Arrow universe , ... it had to be in a style that could hold hands with Arrow . "
On December 18 , 2014 , WaterTower Music released a selection of music from The Flash / Arrow crossover episodes , as well as two bonus tracks from their respective 2014 midseason finales .
The first season , two - disc soundtrack was released on October 16 , 2015 .
The second season 's soundtrack was released digitally on July 22 , 2016 , and in CD format on July 26 , 2016 .
SOUND DESIGN
Section::::Sound design .
The sound design for the show is handled by Mark Camperell .
The sound effect for Barry is made up of elements of thunder , electricity , jets , fireballs , and various custom whooshes and impacts .
Speaking about designing the sound for The Flash 's ability , Mark says : " My approach for the sounds of The Flash 's ability was to editorially treat him like a really aggressively driven hot rod .
This does n't mean that I used car sounds for him , though .
What I mean is that when thinking about how to edit his sounds , I thought about it like cutting a car chase . "
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
The Flash was screened at the Warner Bros. Television and DC Entertainment panel at San Diego Comic - Con International in July 2014 .
The series officially premiered on The CW on October 7 , 2014 , during the 2014–15 television season and also premiered in Canada on the same night .
The second episode was screened at New York Comic Con on October 9 , 2014 , as a way to repay the viewers that watched the series ' premiere episode .
The series premiered in the United Kingdom and Ireland on October 28 , 2014 , and in Australia on December 3 , 2014 .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE
Rotten
TomatoesMetacriticIGN 's Jesse Schedeen stated his concern : " Gustin does n't come across as leading man material .
His awkward bumbling intertwining with Felicity 's was cute , but rarely did I get the impression that this character could or should be given his own spinoff series . "
Schedeen eventually warmed up to the character , however , once the " dorkiness and social awkwardness " were downplayed a bit and the emphasis was placed on " his keen scientific mind " .
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 97 % approval rating with an average rating of 7.5/10 based on 58 reviews .
The website 's consensus reads , " The Flash benefits from its purposefully light atmosphere , making it a superhero show uniquely geared toward genre fans as well as novices . "
Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned a score of 73 out of 100 , based on 27 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
IGN 's Eric Goldman and Joshua Yehl praised the show 's premise and cast after viewing a press screening copy of the pilot .
Goldman and Yehl favorably compared it to Arrow , stating that The Flash progresses with a confidence that Arrow did not get until later in the series .
Reviews for the series became increasingly positive as the season progressed , with the finale receiving critical acclaim .
Noel Murray of The A.V. Club gave the season a B+ overall , giving praise to the pacing of the plot , the performances of the cast and the special effects , and also pointing out the series ' boldness to embrace its comic book influences , something that conventional superhero shows tend not to do .
Weekly episode reviewer Scott Von Doviak gave consistently high ratings to the season and awarded the season finale a perfect A grade , calling the episode " richly satisfying " and also commending the show for " [ capturing ] the essence of its source material in a fun , light - on - its - feet way that few other comic book adaptations have managed . "
He also gave high praise to the emotional value and performances of the cast , as well as the cliffhanger and multiple easter eggs found in the episode .
The second season of The Flash scored a Metacritic rating of 81 out of 100 indicating " universal acclaim " .
In 2016 , Rolling Stone ranked the show # 23 on its list of the " 40 Best Science Fiction TV Shows of All Time " .
CRITICS ' TOP TEN LISTS
*
No . 7 NPR
* No . 7
Omaha World - Herald
*
No . 10
" Film School Rejects
*
No . 4
The Salt Lake Tribune
*
No . 7
Omaha World - Herald
*
No .
10 Indiewire * –
Criticwire
* –
Variety
*
No . 8
The Salt Lake Tribune RATINGS Section::::Ratings .
The first episode of The Flash was watched by 4.8 million viewers and had a 1.9 18–49 demographic rating , making it The CW 's most watched and highest rated series premiere since The Vampire Diaries in 2009 .
It also became The CW 's second - most watched series premiere ever , behind 90210 , and the third - highest rated in the 18–49 demographic .
Factoring Live +
7 day ratings , the pilot was watched by a total of 6.8 million viewers , becoming The CW 's most - watched telecast and the highest - rated premiere among men 18–34 ( 2.5 rating ) .
It broke the previous record for the most - watched telecast held by the cycle 8 finale of America 's Next Top Model in 2007 ( 6.69 million ) .
Additionally , across all platforms , including initiated streams on digital platforms and total unduplicated viewers on - air over two airings the week of October 7 , 2014 , the premiere was seen more than 13 million times .
The Canadian premiere was watched by 3.11 million viewers , making it the most - watched broadcast that night and the second for that week .
In the United Kingdom , the premiere was the fourth highest - rated broadcast of the week and the eleventh of that month , with 1.53 million viewers .
The timeshifted version got 82,000 viewers .
The premiere in Australia was the most - watched broadcast on pay television , with 129,000 viewers tuning in .
In 2016 , according to an analysis from Parrot Analytics , which used ratings data ( where available ) , peer - to - peer sharing , social media chatter , and other factors to estimate viewer demand for various shows , The Flash was the 5th most popular show in the world with 3.1 million demand expressions per day , behind Game of Thrones , The Walking Dead , Pretty Little Liars , and Westworld .
TorrentFreak also gauged The Flash as the fourth most - torrented television show of 2016 .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
! scope="col " Year ! scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Category ! scope="col " Nominee(s ) ! scope="col " Result ! scope="col " class="unsortable " rowspan="2"IGN Awards Best Comic Book Adaptation TV The Flash Best TV Series
The Flash Poppy Awards Best Actor ,
Drama Grant Gustin
rowspan="4"IGN Awards Best Comic Book TV Series
The Flash Best TV Hero
Grant Gustin
Best TV Villain Tom Cavanagh
Grant Gustin Poppy Awards
Best Supporting Actor ,
Drama Jesse L. Martin OTHER MEDIA DIGITAL
COMIC Section::::Other media .
Section::::Digital comic .
The Flash : Season Zero , written by Kreisberg , Brooke Eikmeier and Katherine Walczak , with art by Phil Hester and Eric Gapstur , is intended to take place between the pilot episode and episode 2 .
Kreisberg stated , " Barry will [ already ] be the Flash , he will have his team , everyone will be in that world , and we 'll introducing a new set of villains that we wo n't be seeing on the TV show .
It 'll feel like the same heart , humor and spectacle that you get watching Flash .
" The comic will showcase the entire TV cast , plus new rogues , a group of circus performers who gained super powers as a result of the S.T.A.R. Labs particle accelerator explosion .
The group is led by Mr. Bliss , a character who first appeared in Starman .
The comic launched digitally biweekly on September 8 , 2014 , with its first physical release featuring a collection of the digital releases , releasing on October 1 .
THE CHRONICLES OF CISCO Section::::The Chronicles of Cisco .
On February 24 , 2015 , The CW launched a Tumblr account known as The Chronicles of Cisco .
The blog features posts written by the fictional character of Cisco Ramon , at first serving as write - ups of the metahuman villains on the show .
Starting with the second season of the show , the posts evolved into the general musings of Ramon and his commentary on the events during and outside of The Flash 's episodes .
PROMOTIONAL SHORTS
CHRONICLES OF CISCO
: ENTRY 0419 Section::::Promotional shorts .
Section::::Chronicles of Cisco : Entry 0419 .
On April 19 , 2016 , a four - episode series of shorts , titled Chronicles of Cisco : Entry 0419 , premiered .
The series , which was presented by AT&T , features Valdes and Britne Oldford reprise their role as Cisco Ramon and Shawna
Baez / Peek - a - Boo , respectively .
Set in the second season of the television series , the series sees Cisco attempting to make the Flash suit bulletproof and body - odor proof .
While working on these , he receives a late - night Meta - Human Alert within S.T.A.R. Labs , and learns that Peek - a - Boo triggered the alert .
She has come to S.T.A.R. Labs to make Cisco create a weapon for her , as he did for Golden Glider , Captain Cold , and Heatwave .
When he does not cooperate , she shoots him .
Cisco survives being shot , realizing that the orange soda he spilt on his shirt was the missing catalyst to his bulletproof formula .
Cisco tries to bring Peek - a - Boo back to the pipeline , but she locks him in the cell instead .
Cisco is then seen being woken up due to a call from Barry .
He believes he dreamt the whole experience , until he finds the bullet that shot him on the ground .
STRETCHED
SCENES
Section::::Stretched Scenes .
On November 14 , 2017 , a three - episode series of shorts , known as " Stretched Scenes " , premiered .
The series , presented by Microsoft Surface , features Hartley Sawyer , Danielle Panabaker , and Candice Patton as Ralph Dibny , Cailtin Snow , and Iris West respectively .
Set during the show 's fourth season , it shows Dibny as he continually bothers Cailtin and Iris for their help , or for attention .
The shorts premiered online as well as during the commercial breaks of the episodes " When Harry Met Harry ... " , " Therefore I Am " , and " Do n't Run " .
VIDEO GAMES Section::::Video games .
The series has also been featured in other video games based off DC Comics property .
In the mobile version of , the show 's versions of the Flash and Reverse - Flash appear as alternate costumes for the Flash .
The show 's version of S.T.A.R. Labs also appears as a hidden area in Lego Dimensions .
In September 2018 , Warner Bros. announced that the season pass for the game Lego DC Super - Villains would included content inspired by The Flash .
BOOKS NOVELS Section::::Books .
Section::::Novels .
On November 29 , 2016 , Titan Books released Flash : The Haunting of Barry Allen , a tie - in novelization written by Susan and Clay Griffith , set during the course of the second season , after Barry has closed the temporal anomaly that nearly destroyed Central City .
Barry must seek help from Oliver Queen , due to his own abilities beginning to break down , in order to deal with five members of his Rogues Gallery — including Pied Piper , Weather Wizard , and Peekaboo .
The story continued in Arrow — A Generation of Vipers , released on March 28 , 2017 .
A subsequent novel , following the villain Weather Wizard in his attempts at revenge , was released in May 2018 .
Written by Richard A. Knaak , it is titled The Flash : Climate Changeling .
In October , 2017 , Abrams Books started a new trilogy of The Flash novels , written by Barry Lyga , aimed at middle - grade readers in tandem with a similar trilogy of Supergirl novels .
The first , The Flash :
Hocus Pocus , was released on October 3 , 2017 .
The novel takes place in an alternate timeline where the show 's " Flashpoint " event never occurred , and The Flash must fight a villain known as Hocus Pocus who can control the minds and actions of people .
A sequel , The Flash : Johnny Quick was released on April 3 , 2018 , as well as a third novel , titled The Flash :
The Tornado Twins , on October 2 , 2018 .
BEHIND - THE - SCENES
Section::::Behind - the - scenes .
On October 21 , 2016 , " The Art and Making of The Flash " by Abbie Bernstein was released .
This is a 160-page behind - the - scenes book with production art and behind - the - scenes photography .
The book also includes interviews with the cast and crew from the show .
HOME MEDIA
*
The Fastest Man Alive !
* Creating the Blur
* Audio Commentary * Behind The Story : The Trickster Returns * The Chemistry of Emily and Grant Screen Test * DC Comics Night at Comic - Con 2014
Presenting Gotham , The Flash , Constantine and Arrow * The Flash Factor !
*
Gag Reel
* Deleted Scenes
* The Flash : 2015
Comic - Con Panel *
Behind - the - scenes
* Vixen : Season 1 * The Many Faces of Zoom
* Kevin Smith on ' Flash ' Point * Deleted Scenes *
Gag Reel
* The Flash : 2016 Comic - Con Panel
* A Flash in Time :
Time Travel in the Flash Universe * Villain School :
The Flash Rogues * Allied : The Invasion Complex ( The Flash ) * Rise of Gorilla City *
The Flash : I 'm Your Super Friend * The Flash :
Hitting the Fast Note
* Harmony in a Flash * Synchronicity in a Flash * A Conversation with Andrew Kreisberg and Kevin Smith
* Deleted Scenes *
Gag Reel
* All four episodes of the Crisis on Earth - X crossover
*
The Best of DC TV 's Comic - Con Panels San Diego 2017 * Inside the Crossover : Crisis on
Earth - X
*
The Elongated Man * Flash Time on Amunet Black with Katee , Eric and Sterling
*
The Fastest Mind Alive : The Thinker ARROWVERSE AND THE DC MULTIVERSE Section::::Arrowverse and the DC multiverse .
In January 2015 , The CW president Mark Pedowitz announced the intention to do a Flash / Arrow crossover every season , and The CW announced that an animated web - series , Vixen , featuring the DC heroine of the same name and set in the universe of Arrow and The Flash , would be debuting on CW Seed in late 2015 .
The character is expected to make a live - action appearance on Arrow and/or The Flash as well .
The next month , it was reported that a spin - off series , which is described as a superhero team - up show , was in discussion by The CW for a possible 2015–16 midseason release .
Berlanti and Kreisberg would executive produce alongside Guggenheim and Sarah Schechter .
The potential series would be headlined by several recurring characters from both Arrow and The Flash , with the potential for other Arrow / Flash characters to cross over to the new series as well .
In May 2015 , The CW officially picked up the series , titled DC 's Legends of Tomorrow .
The second season begins to explore the concept of the multiverse , by introducing Earth-2 , which features doppelgängers of the inhabitants in the Arrowverse ( or Earth-1 ) , along with Jay Garrick , the Flash of Earth-2 , and Zoom .
In the episode " Welcome to Earth-2 " , as Barry , Cisco and Harrison Wells of Earth-2 travel to Earth-2 , glimpses of the multiverse are seen , including an image of Supergirl star Melissa Benoist as Supergirl and an image of John Wesley Shipp as the Flash from the 1990 television series , implying the two characters and their respective television series exist on alternate Earths to the Arrowverse ; Supergirls world is later designated Earth-38 in the Arrowverse multiverse .
Gustin as Barry appeared on the eighteenth episode of Supergirl , " Worlds Finest " , which aired on CBS on March 28 , 2016 .
Intersecting with the events of the eighteenth episode of The Flash , which aired on April 19 , 2016 , Barry accidentally arrives on Earth-38 and helps Kara battle two of her enemies , Silver Banshee ( Italia Ricci ) and Livewire ( Brit Morgan ) , before returning home .
SEE ALSO
* The Flash ( 1990 TV series ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS