LAST FOREVER
" Last Forever " is the final episode of the CBS sitcom How I Met Your Mother .
The episode serves as the 23rd and 24th episode of season nine , and the 207th and 208th episode overall ; the episode 's two parts are classified as two separate episodes .
It aired on March 31 , 2014 .
" Last Forever " received a polarized response from fans and TV critics , primarily in regard to the final twist ending , the relationship between Ted and Robin , and the fate of the series ' titular mother .
Many viewers expressed considerable disdain for the apparent disregard for character development , while some praised it for tying up loose ends .
However , additional praise was directed to the acting , especially Neil Patrick Harris 's performance .
PLOT
PART 1 Section::::Plot .
Section::::Part 1 .
In a flashback to September 2005 , Ted ( Josh Radnor ) , Marshall ( Jason Segel ) , Lily ( Alyson Hannigan ) and Barney ( Neil Patrick Harris ) accept Robin ( Cobie Smulders ) into their group .
Lily , optimistic about Robin 's friendship , decrees that Ted and Barney can not hook up with her unless they marry her , and Barney scoffs at the idea .
In May 2013 , Ted discusses his move to Chicago with Marshall and Lily at Barney and Robin 's wedding reception .
Meanwhile , Barney recognizes the bass player — already introduced in previous episodes as the Mother ( Cristin Milioti)—as the woman who advised him to pursue Robin .
He approaches Ted with the intent to introduce her to him , but Ted declines the idea .
After the group sadly bids Ted farewell , he goes to the Farhampton train station , where an elderly lady ( Judith Drake ) asks Ted many questions about destiny and spots the Mother standing nearby .
Ted insists he ca n't talk to her because he 's moving .
The next night , Marshall and Lily are surprised to see Ted sitting at their table in MacLaren 's .
He tells them that he met a girl , of which they approve after finding out she is the bass player from the wedding .
In 2015 , Ted , now engaged , meets Robin and Barney at MacLaren 's to discuss wedding ideas .
As Robin goes to buy drinks , Barney admits their marriage is suffering because of Robin 's rising career , which requires her to travel frequently .
The Mother arrives and tells Ted they have to delay their wedding because she is pregnant .
In May 2016 , Ted and the Mother host a get - together with the rest of the gang .
Marshall is miserable at his new job , having been forced to return to being a corporate lawyer .
Barney and Robin reveal that after three years of marriage , they have divorced .
The mood turns positive when Barney realizes that Marshall and Lily are expecting their third child , but Lily is worried about the group breaking apart .
Together they promise they will all be there for the big moments and will remain friends .
In October 2016 , Marshall and Lily decide to move out of their old apartment and put together a final Halloween roof party .
Robin is sad to see Ted and the Mother with matching " hanging chad " outfits , alongside Barney who has returned to his womanizing ways .
She decides to leave and confesses to Lily that she ca n't be in the group any longer as she has outgrown them and still has unresolved feelings for Ted , which devastates Lily .
PART 2 Section::::Part 2 .
In 2018 , Barney gets ready for another night at MacLaren 's , even though Ted and Lily , both being parents , are n't intending to stay out late .
Marshall arrives and announces he is replacing a retiring judge in Queens , which prompts a celebration .
When Barney attempts to score with a young woman , Lily blasts him for fully regressing into his previous self .
After Barney defends his behavior by telling her that he will never make it work with anyone except Robin , Lily relents and Barney leaves to enjoy his night .
In 2019 , Ted , the Mother , Marshall and Lily are at Robots Versus Wrestlers .
A depressed Barney shows up to say that while he recently completed a " perfect month " using a new Playbook , the last woman is pregnant with his child .
Sometime later , Ted runs into Robin , now a famous news reporter , while showing Penny the GNB building he designed .
Marshall , Lily , and Ted gather at the birth of Barney 's daughter , Ellie .
Despite his initial misgivings , Barney is moved to tears .
At Ted and the Mother 's house , Ted re - proposes to the Mother , and says they are getting married the following Thursday .
Before the wedding , the gang meets up at MacLaren 's , and Marshall announces he is running for the New York State Supreme Court .
Barney sees two young women at the bar and scolds them for dressing inappropriately , which genuinely surprises Lily .
While reconciling with the gang , Robin admits to Ted that after initially declining to come , the Mother told her to reconsider .
Lily gives a toast praising Ted for all he has been through , and Future Ted narrates how he never stopped loving the Mother for a second , even when she became terminally ill and died in 2024 .
Returning the story to May 2013 , Ted gets the courage to introduce himself to the bass player , and she invites him underneath her yellow umbrella .
The two engage in a conversation where she tells Ted she remembers him on his first day as a professor , and reveals her name is Tracy McConnell .
Their conversation continues as the train arrives .
In 2030 , when Future Ted finishes his story , Penny ( Lyndsy Fonseca ) and Luke ( David Henrie ) deduce that it was actually about how he still has feelings for their " Aunt " Robin , and give their blessings to continue his relationship with her .
Ted decides to go to her apartment with the blue French horn , presenting it the same way he had 25 years earlier .
Robin , who is revealed to be living alone , seems moved , and they both smile at each other .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Before writing the episode , Carter Bays and Craig Thomas decided to watch the series finales of other sitcoms for inspiration .
They said that they crafted the last ten minutes of the series right from the start .
In February 2014 , Bays tweeted that he found a rough draft of the series finale that he first wrote in 2006 .
The scene involving Ted 's future children ( Lyndsy Fonseca and David Henrie ) was secretly shot in 2006 during the production of Season 2 .
This was primarily done so the teenage characters would not age , since Fonseca and Henrie were adults by the time the final episode aired .
The scene was filmed on a set closed to everyone except Bays , Thomas , executive producer / director Pamela Fryman , a camera operator , and Fonseca and Henrie , who signed non - disclosure agreements .
Fonseca stated that she had forgotten the details of the scene in the years since its filming , while Henrie said , " I do remember .
I think I remember .
We 'll see . "
Josh Radnor was also told some parts of the finale from the start , but neither he nor the rest of the cast were informed how the series would end .
Radnor , not Bob Saget , plays future Ted when he appears on camera .
When asked whether he should have played the role , Saget said that Radnor doing so " felt appropriate to me .
It 's not The Matrix , it 's where Ted CGI 's into a narrator of his voice that was done as a sweet way to tell his story from almost his conscience from the future of his own life " .
Before the airing of the series finale , debates raged amongst fans concerning the fate of Ted and the Mother , fueled by scenes from " Vesuvius " and other previous episodes that seemed to point to a tragic ending .
According to tweets from Alyson Hannigan , approximately 18 minutes of the original episode had to be cut to fit the broadcast time .
One cut sequence features Lily paying back Marshall regarding a bet on whether Ted and Robin end up together , first referenced in the episode " No Pressure " .
Other cut scenes feature Robin , wearing her Robin Sparkles jeans jacket over her wedding dress , singing " Let 's Go to The Mall " with the Mother 's band at the wedding reception , and a " one - second " montage showing Tracy 's funeral .
An alternative cut of the ending appeared on the season nine DVD and the box set .
It did not contain any new footage , but is edited in a way that changes the fates of Ted , Tracy and Robin .
The voiceover is performed by Saget , rather than Radnor , and is completely different .
Everything but the Girl 's acoustic cover of the Tom Waits song " Downtown Train " was used in the scene where Ted and The Mother meet at the Farhampton train station .
Music supervisor Andy Gowan says that Carter Bays " basically put it in the script , and wrote that script with that song in mind " ; Gowan described the song as " heartbreakingly beautiful " and captured both the " sweet and romantic " and the " somber , dark part " of the scene .
" Heaven " by The Walkmen features in the final scene of " Last Forever " .
Gowan said that " it seemed like it was written for our show " .
Gowan had suggested the song before , especially for use in the season 8 premiere , and said that when he pitched it for use in the season 9 finale , " [ the song ] was just the one that resonated with all of us the most " .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
" Last Forever " received a polarizing reaction from fans and critics alike , with the majority opinion being negative .
Many viewers expressed considerable dissatisfaction regarding the resolution of Ted 's story , his relationship to Robin , and the fate of the titular mother .
Additionally , the season - long buildup for Barney and Robin 's wedding and their divorce 10 minutes into the next episode was criticized .
Fans took to social media , such as Tumblr and Twitter , to express their disappointment .
Some fans joked that the episode was an early April Fools ' joke , because it aired on March 31 .
Some fans of the show called on CBS to commission the creators of the show via a change.org petition to rewrite and reshoot the finale .
, the petition had received more than 5,000 signatures .
On April 5 , 2014 , Carter Bays announced on Twitter that an alternative ending , from the same filmed material , would be included on the Season 9 DVD .
Bill Kuchman of Popculturology said that the success of Milioti as the Mother made it hard to write the character away so quickly , saying , " Thanks to the show 's writing staff and Cristin Milioti , HIMYM had a huge victory on its hands with The Mother .
Asking fans to drop all of that with a simple line about The Mother getting sick and passing away was a very difficult request . "
Kuchman noted that " [ over ] the course of this final season , HIMYM made us care about Tracy .
It made us believe that she and Ted belonged together .
It was earned .
That 's why it was sad to see HIMYM just brush Tracy away . "
Donna Bowman of The A.V. Club graded the episode a B+ , saying , " The hour finale was a strange ride , marvelous in some ways , confounding in others .
Endings are difficult , and I do n't think any objective assessment would say they nailed this one .
"
Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club was more blunt in saying that " Bays and Thomas simply looked like shitty long - term planners , unable to understand that getting the audience so invested in the Barney and Robin coupling or in Tracy as a character would make it all the harder when the series finale abruptly dissolved the former and treated the latter 's death as an aside in the narration .
That the show never seemed to suggest Ted mourned her feels like a vital betrayal of his character . "
Alan Sepinwall of HitFix cited three reasons why Bays and Thomas should not have stuck with the ending they had originally envisioned at the start : the show 's lengthy run forced them to stretch out events like Barney 's and Robin 's wedding , which would have to be quickly undone in the finale ; the chemistry between Cobie Smulders and Neil Patrick Harris caused many fans to become deeply invested in Robin and Barney 's relationship more than Robin and Ted 's ; and the casting of Cristin Milioti as the Mother caused fans to become invested in that character as well .
Sepinwall stated that " so much of what was terrible here was terrible because Bays and Thomas had a very specific vision for the ending of their show and would not — or , perhaps , after they filmed the kids ' reactions , could not — deviate from it .
And based on the initial reaction I 've seen to the episode , it 's going to forever sour the opinion many fans of the show had for it . "
Joyce Eng of TV Guide said that she 'd prefer Ted not to have ended up with Robin , but " as I consider the romantics that co - creators Carter Bays and Craig Thomas are , it 's obvious they would bring this long , winding love story full circle back to the person Ted wanted to be with when we met him .
And The Mother — excuse us , Tracy — is reunited with her first true love , Max , too . "
Though the Mother served as a " cheap plot device " to a degree , Eng said that " Ted 's time with her also taught him nothing lasts forever , nothing 's perfect .
And he needs to move on with his life , but that does n't make his relationship with The Mother any less important .
I do n't think the Ted of 2005 would 've done the same . "
Andrew Meola from MStars praised the episode , saying " I could n't believe that they actually killed the Mother .
But I let it sit for a bit , and then I felt something profoundly beautiful come out of this last hour of How I Met Your Mother . "
In the years succeeding its airing , it continued to be singled out as one of television 's worst series finales , e.g. , topping USA Todays list of " Worst Series Finales of All Time " .
In an interview with David Letterman , Neil Patrick Harris declared himself a fan of the way the finale ended the series : Some people just hated it , and I think that that 's a compliment to the show in a weird way because it means that they have grown up with these characters and feel like they wanted it to go a certain way , though I think it 's great .
But our show really did cross the line between funny funny and really serious , and that was kind of the balance that this show had .
And as the show grew up , and as we grew up in the show , it ended in a more adult way
and I think it was a nice , reflective , kind of sad , but happy ending to a long , long story .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS