THE KILLING ( SEASON 4 )
The fourth and final season of the American crime drama television series
The Killing consists of six episodes and was released on Netflix on August 1 , 2014 .
Netflix picked up the series after it was canceled by AMC in 2013 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The season features detectives Sarah Linden and Stephen Holder handling the fallout of their actions from the previous season while investigating the murder of a family whose only survivor is a member of an all - boys military academy .
CAST MAIN CAST
* Mireille Enos as Sarah Linden * Joel Kinnaman as Stephen Holder * Gregg Henry as Carl Reddick
* Tyler Ross as Kyle Stansbury , a member of the all - boys military academy and survivor of a family massacre * Sterling Beaumon as Lincoln Knopf * Levi Meaden as AJ Fielding * Liam James as Jack Linden , Sarah 's son
*
Amy Seimetz as Danette Leeds
* Billy Campbell as Darren Richmond SPECIAL GUEST STAR
* Joan Allen as Colonel Margaret Rayne , headmaster of the all - boys military academy GUEST STARS
* Jewel Staite as Caroline Swift , Holder 's girlfriend and a District Attorney * Katherine Evans as Bethany Skinner , James Skinner 's daughter * Frances Fisher as Gena Geddes , Sarah 's mother * Annie Corley as Regi Darnell , Sarah 's social worker and mother figure * Marin Ireland as Liz Holder , Stephen 's sister * Patti Smith as Female Doctor EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION Section::::Development and production .
AMC , the network which broadcast the first three seasons , canceled the series after its second season , and revived it for a third , ultimately cancelling it again after the third season in September 2013 .
However , in November 2013 , Netflix , partnering with Fox Television Studios ( the production company for The Killing ) , announced it had picked up the series for a fourth and final season consisting of six episodes .
Series developer and executive producer Veena Sud returned as showrunner , with Dawn Prestwich and Nicole Yorkin returning as writers and executive producers .
Because they are airing on Netflix , episodes in the fourth season have a longer running time of approximately 55–59 minutes compared to 43 minutes when the series aired on AMC with commercials , and characters are able to use stronger profanity .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Cast members
Mireille Enos and Joel Kinnaman return as detectives Sarah Linden and Stephen Holder , respectively .
New series regulars for the fourth season include Joan Allen as Margaret Rayne , the head of an all - boys military academy .
In February 2014 , Sterling Beaumon , Levi Meaden , and Tyler Ross were cast as Lincoln Knopf , AJ Fielding , and Cameron Stanton ( later changed to Kyle Stansbury ) , respectively ; playing teens connected to the military academy .
Gregg Henry , who had a recurring role in the third season as Detective Carl Reddick , was promoted to series regular for the fourth season .
The season also introduces Sarah Linden 's mother , played by Frances Fisher , who abandoned her daughter when Sarah was young .
PROMOTIONAL VIDEO
Section::::Promotional video .
In July 2014 , an official 90-second trailer was released showing detectives Linden and Holder attempting to cover up Linden 's killing Skinner at the end of the previous season as well as glimpses of a new case at the military academy .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
The fourth season scored 53 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 14 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 44 % critics rating with an average rating of 6.5/10 based on 18 reviews .
The website consensus reads : " While its characters still intrigue and its atmosphere remains absorbingly dark , The Killing succumbs to silliness in its fourth season , straying into distractingly overwrought territory " .
HOME MEDIA RELEASES Section::::Home media releases .
The fourth season of The Killing was released on DVD on August 4 , 2015 , exclusively through Amazon 's CreateSpace manufacture - on - demand program .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS