HAPPY VALLEY ( TV SERIES )
Happy Valley is a British crime drama television series filmed and set in the Calder Valley , West Yorkshire in Northern England .
The series , starring Sarah Lancashire and Siobhan Finneran , is written and created by Sally Wainwright , and directed by Wainwright , Euros Lyn , and Tim Fywell .
The first series debuted on BBC One on 29 April 2014 , and the second series debuted on 9 February 2016 .
In May 2015 , Happy Valley won the BAFTA Award for Best Drama Series .
Sarah Lancashire initially said that she would not return for a third series , but later confirmed to the news media that she will return .
However , no date has been set because Sally Wainwright has previous commitments to work on other projects .
"
Sally has told us she wants to write another series , which will be the final one .
We do n't know when it will happen , " Sarah Lancashire said in September 2016 .
Producer Nicola Shindler has confirmed that the series would not be broadcast until 2018 at the earliest .
As of December 2018 , no air date for the third series had been announced .
EPISODES
SERIES 1 Section::::Episodes .
Section::::Series 1 .
Catherine Cawood ( Sarah Lancashire ) is a strong - willed police sergeant in West Yorkshire , still coming to terms with the suicide of her teenage daughter , Becky , eight years earlier .
Cawood is now divorced from her husband and living with her sister , Clare ( Siobhan Finneran ) , a recovering alcoholic and heroin addict , who is helping her bring up Becky 's young son , Ryan ( Rhys Connah ) , the product of rape .
Neither Catherine 's ex - husband nor their adult son , Daniel , want anything to do with Ryan .
Catherine hears that Tommy Lee Royce ( James Norton ) , the man responsible for the brutal rape that impregnated Becky and drove her to suicide shortly after Ryan was born , is out of prison after serving eight years for drug charges .
Catherine soon becomes obsessed with finding Royce , unaware that he is involved in the kidnapping of Ann Gallagher ( Charlie Murphy ) , a plot instigated by Kevin Weatherill ( Steve Pemberton ) and orchestrated by Ashley Cowgill ( Joe Armstrong ) .
Things quickly take a dark turn as the abductors scramble to keep the kidnapping secret , although Catherine is on to them .
SERIES 2
Section::::Series 2 .
Eighteen months after the events of the first series , Catherine Cawood ( Sarah Lancashire ) is back at work and has won the Queen 's Police Medal ( QPM ) for gallantry , for rescuing Ann Gallagher ( Charlie Murphy ) from Tommy Lee Royce ( James Norton ) , who is serving a life sentence in prison .
But when Royce 's mother is killed , Catherine finds herself implicated in a string of murders .
While trying to prove her innocence , Catherine is tasked with investigating a human trafficking operation linked to the serial killings .
Meanwhile , senior HMIT officers Detective Superintendent Andy Shepard ( Vincent Franklin ) and Detective Inspector Jodie Shackleton ( Katherine Kelly ) begin to suspect that the supposed fourth victim of the serial killer , Victoria Fleming ( Amelia Bullmore ) , was in fact murdered by someone else .
Gradually their investigation starts to lead them towards Victoria 's actual killer – police detective John Wadsworth ( Kevin Doyle ) , whom Fleming had been blackmailing .
Catherine 's grandson , Ryan , develops a friendship with a new teaching assistant , Miss Wealand ( Shirley Henderson ) , who is secretly a prison groupie infatuated with Royce .
Royce , whom the court has forbidden having any contact with Ryan , is using Wealand to try to build a relationship with Ryan and get revenge on Catherine .
Ryan increasingly concerns his family by asking questions about his father and even suggests Royce should be forgiven .
CAST
* Sarah Lancashire as Sgt .
Catherine Cawood * Siobhan Finneran as Clare Cartwright
* Charlie Murphy as Ann Gallagher * James Norton as Tommy Lee Royce
* George Costigan as Nevison Gallagher PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On 22 November 2012 , Ben Stephenson announced the commissioning of Happy Valley for BBC One .
The programme was written by Sally Wainwright , produced by Karen Lewis , and directed by Euros Lyn , Sally Wainwright , and Tim Fywell .
Filming began in the Calder Valley in November 2013 .
Locations in the area included Todmorden , Luddenden , Mytholmroyd , Bradford , Keighley , Sowerby Bridge , Hebden Bridge , and Heptonstall .
Huddersfield , Halifax , Bradford , Leeds , and other West Yorkshire cities are mentioned , though not main filming locations .
A former West Yorkshire police station was used for some scenes , and additional filming took place at North Light Film Studios at Brookes Mill , Huddersfield .
The name " Happy Valley " is what local police in the Calder Valley call the area because of its drug problem .
In the series one premiere episode , Ryan points out to Catherine , who is visiting her daughter Becky 's grave in the next row , that visitors have left pens at Sylvia Plath Hughes ' grave .
A second series was commissioned on 18 August 2014 .
Filming began in August 2015 , and the first episode was broadcast on 9 February 2016 .
The second series was written by Wainwright , produced by Lewis , and directed by Lyn and Wainwright .
Catherine 's workplace is a former police station in Sowerby Bridge , and her home and local pub ( two other main filming locations ) are based in Hebden Bridge .
The prison scenes were filmed at Oakham Enterprise Park in Rutland , which was Ashwell Prison until its closure .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The first episode aired on 29 April 2014 at 21:00 .
It garnered 8.64 million viewers , and it was the second most watched show of the week ( commencing 28 April 2014 ) for BBC One .
The BBC reported that the show received an average consolidated audience of 8.21 million viewers , over six episodes , and an additional 8.1 million requests for the show on BBC iPlayer .
Radio Times called Happy Valley a " word - of - mouth hit " which " steadily became a success outside the normal audience for the slot and channel . "
After " Episode 1 " aired , Ofcom received four complaints under the category " violence and dangerous behaviour " , but they did not pursue the matter .
Reviews from the media have been overwhelmingly positive , and the show has received 100 % rating critic review on Rotten Tomatoes .
However , some reviewers have criticised the show for its graphic content , especially in " Episode 3 " and " Episode 4 " .
The Daily Mails TV correspondent Alasdair Glennie questioned whether or not the BBC went " too far " in " Episode 4 " with the brutal attack on police sergeant Cawood and the murder of one of her officers .
The Daily Mail claimed that the BBC had received " 15 complaints about [ " Episode 4 " ] , which aired between 9 pm and 10 pm after the watershed , while 45 viewers contacted the [ BBC ] corporation to say how much they enjoyed the show . "
Vivienne Pattison , a campaigner for stronger television regulations and a part of Mediawatch - uk , declared that the violence " is part of a worrying trend in TV drama . "
In response to the criticism , Happy Valleys creator - writer , Wainwright , defended the show as " a quality , well - written drama " and stated , " Judging by the amount of email , texts , tweets I 've had , I do n't think anyone is asking me to apologise .
" In an interview with Radio Times , Wainwright said the level of violence had been carefully considered and it was done responsibly , by showing the psychological and physical damage suffered by Catherine .
Other critics have praised the show .
Vicky Frost of The Guardian wrote : " To get hung up on the violence of this BBC1 kidnap drama misses the point .
It is beautifully written by Sally Wainwright , draws an astonishing performance from Sarah Lancashire — and between them , they have created something truly unmissable . "
Another Daily Mail TV correspondent , Christopher Stevens , rated " Episode 4 " with 5/5 stars , saying that " every instalment has been unmissable " and " BAFTA bosses might as well get next year 's trophy inscribed now " for star Sarah Lancashire .
Gerard O'Donovan of The Telegraph called Happy Valley " complex , thrilling and brilliantly written and acted " , and " one of the best watches of 2014 . "
AWARDS Section::::Awards .
In May 2015 , Happy Valley won the BAFTA Award for Best Drama Series .
In 2014 , it had won a TV Choice Award for Best New Drama ; Sarah Lancashire was named Best Actress at the same time .
The series was also voted the best TV programme of 2014 by readers of Radio Times .
INTERNATIONAL
Norway
NRK
Italy
Netflix AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Association ! !
Category ! !
Nominee(s ) ! !
Result !
Association ! !
Category ! !
Nominee(s ) ! !
Result HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
BBC Shop released Happy Valley series one on DVD , in regions two and four , on 16 June 2014 .
The DVD includes two discs , featuring 351 minutes worth of footage , and has an age certificate of 15 .
All six episodes of the series were released on iTunes , both in standard and high definition .
On 20 August 2014 , the series was further released on Netflix in Canada and the USA , marketed as a " Netflix Original " .
In the summer of 2016 Series 1 of Happy Valley was released on Netflix in the UK and is currently repeated on the channel ' W ' .
A year later Series 2 was released on Netflix in the UK .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Happy Valley , scripts at BBC TV Drama archive