NCIS :
NEW ORLEANS
NCIS :
New Orleans is an American television series combining elements of the military drama and police procedural genres that premiered on Tuesday , September 23 , 2014 , following its parent series NCIS .
The pilot was written by Gary Glasberg .
The series stars Scott Bakula and CCH Pounder , and is executively produced by Glasberg , Mark Harmon , James Hayman and Chris Silber .
The series is set and filmed in New Orleans .
It is the third series of the NCIS franchise .
On April 18 , 2018 , CBS renewed the series for a fifth season .
The season premiered on September 25 , 2018 .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
NCIS :
New Orleans follows a fictional team of Naval Criminal Investigative Service ( NCIS ) agents stationed out of New Orleans , Louisiana and led by Special Agent Dwayne Cassius Pride ( Scott Bakula ) .
The team focuses on crimes that involve personnel in the United States Navy and Marine Corps , and their territory ranges from the Mississippi River to the Texas Panhandle .
The agents under Pride 's supervision include Christopher LaSalle ( Lucas Black ) , a former Jefferson Parish sheriff 's deputy recruited by Pride following Hurricane Katrina ; Meredith Brody ( Zoe McLellan ) , a transfer from the NCIS Great Lakes field office , who has worked as a Special Agent Afloat and is keen to leave her past behind as she moves to New Orleans ; Sonja Percy ( Shalita Grant ) , a former ATF special agent and LaSalle 's partner ; Tammy Gregorio ( Vanessa Ferlito ) , an FBI prodigy recruited after a short stint investigating Pride ; and Sebastian Lund ( Rob Kerkovich ) , a criminalist turned forensics agent and the team 's newest member .
They are assisted by Patton Plame ( Daryl Mitchell ) , a computer specialist , and Dr. Loretta Wade ( CCH Pounder ) , a forensic pathologist .
CAST AND CHARACTERS * Scott Bakula as , NCIS Supervisory Special Agent / Special Agent in Charge * Lucas Black
as , NCIS Special Agent * Zoe McLellan as , NCIS Special Agent ( seasons 1–2 ) * Rob Kerkovich as , forensic scientist / NCIS Forensics Agent * CCH Pounder as , medical examiner
* Shalita Grant as , ATF Agent / NCIS Special Agent ( seasons 2–4 ; recurring previously ) * Daryl " Chill " Mitchell as , NCIS computer specialist ( season 2 – ; recurring previously ) * Vanessa Ferlito as , FBI Agent / NCIS Special Agent ( season 3 – ) * Necar Zadegan as Hannah Khoury , NCIS Supervisory Special Agent ( season 5 – ) PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On January 12 , 2015 , NCIS : New Orleans was renewed for a second season that premiered on September 22 , 2015 .
On March 25 , 2016 , CBS renewed the series for a third season , which premiered on September 20 , 2016 .
Show creator and executive producer Gary Glasberg , age 50 , died unexpectedly on September 28 , 2016 .
On March 23 , 2017 , CBS renewed the series for a fourth season , which premiered on September 26 , 2017 .
On April 18 , 2018 , CBS renewed the series for a fifth season , which premiered on September 25 , 2018 .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Scott Bakula was cast as the series lead on February 2014 with CCH Pounder , Zoe McLellan and Lucas Black joining soon thereafter .
Rob Kerkovich joined the cast in July .
He was the final original cast member to join the series , though Daryl Mitchell and Shalita Grant joined the series as regulars during season 2 .
Both had recurred previously .
In July 2016 , Zoe McLellan , who plays Special Agent Meredith Brody , left the series " for creative reasons " , and Vanessa Ferlito joined the cast as FBI Special Agent Tammy Gregorio , a series regular .
On February 2 , 2018 , it was announced that Shalita Grant would leave the series in the 17th episode of season 4 ; she would ultimately depart in the 19th episode .
On August 24 , 2018 , it was announced that Necar Zadegan would join the cast as Special Agent Hannah Khoury in season 5 .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
Brad Kern became the series showrunner in January 2016 .
Within a year he had become the focus of two investigations for inappropriate behavior toward women .
On May 17 , 2018 , it was reported that Kern was exiting his role as executive producer and showrunner , but would remain as consulting producer , with Chris Silber replacing him as showrunner .
Kern was placed on suspension in June 2018 , when CBS launched a third investigation into claims of harassment , which ultimately led to his firing by CBS in October 2018 .
SYNDICATION Section::::Syndication .
In December 2017 , TNT acquired the rerun rights to the series .
EPISODES
INTERNATIONAL BROADCAST Section::::International broadcast .
NCIS :
New Orleans airs simultaneously on Global in Canada .
In Australia , the series premiered on Network Ten on October 7 , 2014 .
The series has been sold to Channel 5 in the United Kingdom , which premiered it on February 13 , 2015 .
From season 4 onwards , the series will premiere on Fox UK on Fridays at 9PM starting on July 20 , 2018 .
The series has also been sold to Prime in New Zealand and Fox in Asia .
On April 2 , 2015 , the series began airing on South Africa 's M - Net cable TV service and is broadcast to several other sub - Saharan African nations via DStv .
RECEPTION SEASONAL RATINGS Section::::Reception .
Section::::Seasonal ratings . !
scope="col " rowspan="2 " Season ! scope="col " rowspan="2 " Timeslot ( ET CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
NCIS :
New Orleans has received mixed reviews from critics .
Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gives the first season of the show a rating of 65 % , based on 26 reviews , with an average rating of 5.4/10 .
The site 's consensus reads , " With a solid cast in a beautiful locale , NCIS :
New Orleans makes extending this well - worn franchise look like the Big Easy . "
Metacritic gives the show a score of 55 out of 100 , based on 15 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
In late September 2014 , The Wraps journalist Jason Hughes reviewed the pilot episode of the series , praising the music , the use of the city of New Orleans , and CBS ' decision to cast Scott Bakula as " one of the most likable leading men in television , so they 're set there . "
David Hinckley of the New York Daily News gave a mixed but critical review of the pilot episode , saying there is a " Crescent City flavor here .
But in the larger picture , not much on this menu is unfamiliar . "
Liz Shannon Miller and Ben Travers of Indiewire said that NCIS is like " the obelisk in 2001 :
A Space Odyssey , it 's an awe - inspiring , inescapable presence in the broadcast line - up .
NCIS on CBS : It is here .
It has always been here .
It forever will be . "
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Year !
Association !
Category !
Nominee(s ) !
Result NOTES
REFERENCES General references EXTERNAL LINKS