THE ADVENTURES OF PUSS IN BOOTS
The Adventures of Puss in Boots is an American computer - animated web television series .
It stars the character Puss in Boots from the DreamWorks Animation Shrek franchise and its 2011 spin - off film , voiced by Eric Bauza .
The series premiered with its first five episodes on Netflix on January 16 , 2015 ; the sixth and final season was released on January 26 , 2018 .
It also premiered on Boomerang UK on September 3 , 2018 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The series sees Puss in Boots fight off an endless legion of invaders to protect the previously hidden village of San Lorenzo , after his actions unintentionally broke the spell that protected its legendary mystic treasure from the outside world .
So he must find a way to restore the protection spell that will cloak the town once more .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
The first season debuted on January 16 , 2015 on Netflix , when the first five episodes were released , with further episodes released in May and September 2015 .
A second season was released on December 11 , 2015 .
The third season was released on July 15 , 2016 .
The fourth season was released on December 16 , 2016 .
The fifth season was released on July 28 , 2017 .
The sixth and final season was released on January 26 , 2018 .
An interactive special called " Puss in Book : Trapped in an Epic Tale " was released on June 20 , 2017 .
CHARACTERS MAIN
* Puss in Boots ( voiced by Eric Bauza ) – The titular character .
* Dulcinea ( voiced by Jayma Mays ) – A female cat who is Puss 's love interest .
Mays describes her as sweet and naive , very innocent and sheltered .
* Artephius / The Great Mage Sino ( voiced by Paul Rugg ) – An elderly alchemist who acts as a mad scientist and later reveal to be Sino 's personality in season 6 .
* Señora Zapata ( voiced by Carla Jimenez ) – The administrator of the town 's orphanage .
She is suspicious of Puss 's activities .
* Mayor Temoroso ( voiced by Carlos Alazraqui ) – A big guy who likes to keep a low profile by hiding inside barrels .
* Pajuna ( voiced by Laraine Newman ) – Pajuna is a Highland cow who is the owner of the local cantina .
* Vina ( voiced by Grey Griffin ) – An older orphan who makes up facts and sometimes steps into Puss 's personal space .
* Toby ( voiced by Joshua Rush ) – An orphan .
He is a pig who idolizes Puss .
* Kid Pickles ( voiced by Candi Milo ) – A " Runyon - esque " 11-year - old who likes pickles .
* Esme ( voiced by Ariebella Makana ) – A 5-year - old girl who is described as adorable .
* Li'l Pequeña ( voiced by Grey Griffin ) – A new girl who is introduced in the fifth season and can sometimes act evil .
* Cleevil / Green Tulpa ( voiced by Candi Milo ) – A street - smart goblin in her early teens and a Tulpa in season 6 .
*
Sphinx ( voiced by Grey Griffin ) –
A hairless , winged cat who acts a little like a valley girl and a hipster .
She ( sometimes ) protects the village of San Lorenzo .
RECURRING
* El Moco ( voiced by Danny Trejo ) – A bandit king who is often foiled in the episodes .
* The Duchess / Maldonna Eldritch ( voiced by Maria Bamford ) – One of the recurring villains in the series .
She steals the souls of magicians and sorcerers to use their powers- denying observations that she has no magic of her own- and was involved with Artephius ; she also had a previous fight with Puss , in which the latter had cut off her foot .
* Jack Sprat ( voiced by John Leguizamo ) – One of Puss 's oldest friends who often gets Puss in trouble with his schemes .
*
Uli ( voiced by Alan Tudyk ) –
A clever and manipulative ( and somewhat annoying ) satyr who initially appears friendly to Puss and his frends , but in reality plots to take over San Lorenzo with the help of the demonic Blood Wolf .
* Goodsword ( voiced by John Rhys - Davies for season 1 and voiced by Jeff Bennett thereafter ) – An enchanted sword who falls from the sky stuck into a stone , then chooses Dulcinea to be the town 's hero .
* El Guante Blanco ( voiced by Jim Cummings ) – A black cat with a white front right paw .
El Guante Blanco ( The White Glove in English ) found Puss in the desert after Puss was forced to leave his home town and taught Puss the ways of the sword .
El Guante Blanco also wears a hat , belt and sword , but does not wear boots .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The series was announced in March 2014 as part of an agreement between Netflix and DreamWorks Animation , under which the studio will develop more than 300 hours of exclusive programming for the service .
In 2015 , it was stated that a total of 78 episodes were in production for the series , and they were expected to be released in blocks from 2015 onward in a multi - year deal .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
The New York Times gave the first episode a positive review stating that the show " is nicely drawn , and San Lorenzo is populated with some appealingly odd young residents , human and otherwise . "
Moreover , they praised the humour stating that it was " relatively sophisticated ( you could write a psychological treatise on Dulcinea , who has modeled her life on a somewhat vacuous book of epigrams ) , but not so sophisticated that children will be left behind . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
In 2015 , the second episode of the series , " Sphinx " , was nominated at the Annecy International Animated Film Festival .
In 2016 , the series won an Emmy Award for Outstanding Casting for an Animated Series or Special .
COMIC BOOK Section::::Comic book .
In April 2016 , Titan Comics released the first of a two - issue limited series of comic books as a tie - in to the TV show , under the same title of The Adventures of Puss in Boots .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* at Netflix