AS ABOVE , SO BELOW ( FILM )
As Above , So Below is a 2014 American thriller film written and directed by John Erick Dowdle and co - written by his brother Drew .
It is presented as found footage of a documentary crew 's experience exploring the Catacombs of Paris .
The film was produced by Legendary Pictures and distributed by Universal Pictures , making it the first film in Legendary 's deal with Universal .
The film was released on August 29 , 2014 , and stars Perdita Weeks , Ben Feldman , Edwin Hodge , François Civil , Marion Lambert , and Ali Marhyar .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Scarlett Marlowe , a young alchemist , is searching for the philosopher 's stone , a legendary substance capable of turning base metals into gold and granting eternal life .
After finding the Rose Key and narrowly escaping a cave collapse in Iran , she travels to Paris , where she enlists the help of her ex - boyfriend , George , and cameraman Benji .
They use the Rose Key to translate the headstone of Nicholas Flamel , who wrote about the philosopher 's stone .
The headstone contains a riddle that leads them to believe that the philosopher 's stone is hidden 370.5 feet underneath the streets of Paris .
Scarlett also enlists the help of a guide named Papillon , his girlfriend Souxie , and their friend Zed , who are familiar with the layout of the Catacombs of Paris .
George refuses to follow the group into the catacombs , but is driven underground with the rest when a policeman spots them trespassing .
After crawling through a narrow tunnel which collapses behind them , they encounter female cultists who appear to be performing a mysterious ritual .
The group then find themselves in a blocked tunnel that Papillon is reluctant to enter , as people who have entered have never been seen again .
After venturing deeper into the catacombs , the group encounter La Taupe , a friend of Papillon who disappeared into the catacombs years earlier .
He agrees to guide them out , explaining that the only way out is down .
They eventually find a tomb filled with treasure , as well as the philosopher 's stone .
Removing the stone , Scarlett realizes that the treasure is a trap , and the chamber collapses .
With the philosopher 's stone , Scarlett is able to heal injuries that Souxie sustained in the fall .
La Taupe is lost under the rubble , and the group decide to leave him behind .
The group find a Gnostic Star of David , which symbolizes the notion "
As above , so below . "
Seeing that a door has been drawn onto the ceiling above , Scarlett finds a real door in the floor below .
Beyond the door , the group finds the entrance to a tunnel that is marked with the phrase " Abandon all hope , ye who enter here " in Greek , identical to the entrance to Hell in Dante 's Inferno .
Passing through , they find a reflection of the room they left behind .
There , they discover La Taupe , who kills Souxie before disappearing .
The remaining members of the group realize that they must continue deeper into the catacombs in order to escape , and they climb down a hole .
However , Benji is pushed to his death by the lead female cultist .
Leaving his body behind , the rest encounter a man sitting in a burning car , which recalls an incident in which Papillon was forced to leave someone to die in a car crash ; the man pulls Papillon into the burning car before it disappears and Papillon is left buried upside down .
The rest of the group are unable to pull Papillon from the ground , and they decide to continue into the catacombs .
Visions of demons follow the group through dark tunnels , and one attacks George .
After the philosopher 's stone fails to heal his injuries , George murmurs , " Vitriol .
" Remembering the word from a riddle , Scarlett realizes that the stone itself is yet another trap .
Only by returning it will she find the real philosopher 's stone .
As she races back to the tomb , she finds a hanged man , whom she recognizes as her father .
She apologizes to him for not answering the phone the night that he killed himself .
She then returns to the tomb , where she finds a polished mirror that makes her realize that she possesses the magical abilities of the philosopher 's stone .
Scarlett returns to George and heals him with a kiss .
She then explains to George and Zed that the only way to escape is to admit to their torments , just as she admitted that she feels responsible for her father 's suicide .
George admits that he accidentally allowed his brother to drown when the pair were kids because he got lost looking for help .
Zed admits that he has a son he knows is his , but chooses not to acknowledge , which explains the visions of a running boy he has been seeing during their journey .
As the demons continue to chase them , the group jump down a deep hole .
At the bottom , the hole above them closes and a manhole appears on the ground below .
Jumping through , the group find themselves right side up on a street overlooking the Notre Dame .
Scarlett and George hold each other , realizing that they are safe , while a dazed Zed walks away into the night .
CAST
* Perdita Weeks as Scarlett * Ben Feldman as George * Edwin Hodge as Benji * François Civil as Papillon * Marion Lambert as Souxie * Ali Marhyar as Zed * Pablo Nicomedes as La Taupe
* Hamidreza Javdan as Reza
* Roger Van Hool as Scarlett 's father * Samuel Aouizerate as Danny PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
With permission from the French authorities the film was shot in the real catacombs of Paris .
There was very little use of props , as the actors had to use the environment around them .
Production in the actual catacombs was difficult for the cast and especially the crew as there was no electricity or cell phone service in the centuries - old tunnels .
As Ben Feldman suffered from claustrophobia , he had to keep taking breaks to cope .
DISTRIBUTION MARKETING Section::::Distribution .
Section::::Marketing .
The first trailer of the film was revealed on April 24 , 2014 .
YouTuber PewDiePie
and his girlfriend Marzia Bisognin promoted the film by embarking on a quest into the catacombs , where they would be scared in a variety of ways .
As Above , So Below was released on DVD and Blu - ray on December 2 , 2014 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 25 % based on 72 reviews and an average rating of 4.4/10 .
The website 's critical consensus states , " After an intriguing setup that threatens to claw its way out of found - footage overkill , As Above , So Below plummets into clichéd mediocrity . "
On Metacritic , the film has a rating of 38 out of 100 based on 23 critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews . "
Peter Debruge gave the film a mixed review in Variety , writing , " It all makes for clumsy - fun escapism , not bad as end - of - summer chillers go , but small - time compared with other Legendary releases . "
Debruge called the ending " unspeakably corny . "
Bruce Demara wrote in The Toronto Star , " As Above , So Below has some good scares and a decent cast .
But it 's yet another found footage thriller , so jittery camera sequences may induce nausea . "
Drew Hunt expressed similar sentiments in The Chicago Reader , writing " An intriguing and intensely creepy premise is squandered on this rudimentary found - footage horror film .
"
Terry Staunton gave the film a mildly positive review in Radio Times , stating , " It 's a perfectly serviceable addition to the ' found footage ' genre of chillers from director / co - writer John Erick Dowdle ( Devil ) , who puts cameras in each character 's helmet , allowing quick cuts from one scene to another .
But despite the claustrophobia of the setting , he never quite racks up enough tension for a full - on fright - fest . "
The entertainment oriented website JoBlo wrote , " Not the worst example of found footage by a long shot , and it moves a decent pace with a couple of good scares .
However , this could have been a far more frightening feature if only it had expanded on its scary premise . "
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The film grossed $ 8.3 million its opening weekend , finishing in 3rd place .
As of November 4 , 2014 , the film had grossed $ 21.2 million in North America and $ 18.9 million in other territories , for a total gross of $ 40.1 million .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS