FORTITUDE ( TV SERIES )
Fortitude is a British sci - fi psychological thriller television series created and written by Simon Donald .
A 12-episode series was commissioned by Sky Atlantic in 2013 , and started airing on 29 January 2015 .
The series is set in the fictional Arctic Norwegian settlement of Fortitude .
On 9 April 2015 , Sky Atlantic recommissioned the show for a second series consisting of 10 episodes , which premiered on 26 January 2017 .
The third and final series premiered on 6 December 2018 and consists of 4 episodes .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
On the Norwegian Arctic island of Svalbard , things appear calm on the surface ; a string of violent and increasingly strange deaths , one of which due to an exotic parasite that has survived in the ice for thousands of years , slowly exact a toll on the quiet international community where almost everyone appears to be keeping at least one secret .
CAST
MAIN CAST
RECURRING CAST SERIES 1
* Chipo Chung as Trish Stoddart * Darwin Brokenbro as Liam Sutter
* Elizabeth Dormer - Phillips as Carrie Morgan * Michael Obiora as Max Cordero * Emil Hoștină as Yuri Lubimov * Jonjo O'Neill as Ciaran Donnelly
* Leanne Best as Celia Donnelly * Lorcan Cranitch as DI Bernard Littlejohn SERIES 2
* Jude Akuwudike as Dr. Adebimpe * Gershwyn Eustache Jnr as Tomak Bowzyk * Rune Temte as Lars Ulvinaune
* Eloise Smyth as Yeva Podnikov
* David Yip as Hong Mankyo
* Ralph Riach as Ralfi Sigurdson * Joi Johannsson as Axel Fersen
* Steve Toussaint as Avec Lamont * Mark Field as ' The Fiend ' * Jessica Henwick as Bianca Mankyo PRODUCTION CONCEPTION
Section::::Production .
Section::::Conception .
Writer Simon Donald based his parasite on ichneumon wasps , which lay their eggs in hosts , after talking to a parasitologist .
LOCATION Section::::Location .
Fortitude is a fictional community located on Svalbard in Arctic Norway .
It is described as an international community , with inhabitants from many parts of the world ( population of 713 inhabitants and 4 police officers ) .
The series was filmed in both the UK and in Reyðarfjörður , Iceland .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
American actor Stanley Tucci appears in his first British television role as Detective Chief Inspector Morton from London 's Metropolitan Police , who has flown to the peaceful close - knit community of Fortitude , as the local sheriff , played by Richard Dormer , investigates a violent murder .
Christopher Eccleston plays Charlie Stoddart , a British scientist who leads the arctic biology department at the Fortitude arctic research facility .
Michael Gambon portrays Henry Tyson , a wildlife photographer who is dying of cancer .
The Killing star Sofie Gråbøl plays Hildur Odegard , the governor of Fortitude , in her first UK television drama role .
EPISODES SERIES 1 ( 2015 )
SERIES 2 ( 2017 )
SERIES 3 ( 2018 )
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Critics gave positive reviews .
Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gave the first season an 89 % rating with an average score rating of 7.74 out of 10 based on 27 critic reviews .
The critical consensus reads " Fortitudes fine cast , deliberate pacing , and chilling setting provide the show with more than enough of the titular quality . "
Metacritic gave the first season a score of 75 out of 100 , which indicates " generally favorable reviews " based on 15 critic reviews .
The second season received generally positive reviews .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the season has a 100 % approval rating with an average rating of 7.17 out of 10 based on 6 reviews .
INTERNATIONAL BROADCAST Section::::International broadcast .
In the United States and Canada , the series premiered on 29 January 2015 ( the same date as the UK ) on Pivot and Super Channel , respectively .
It was also dubbed in Persian language and aired by Manoto .
The series debuted in Australia on 15 February 2015 on ABC .
CENSORSHIP Section::::Censorship .
The violent scenes broadcast of the series by FX on 19 February 2017 in Indonesia led to the banning of the channel by Indonesian authority from 10 to 14 April 2017 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS