ANNIHILATION ( VANDERMEER NOVEL )
Annihilation is a 2014 novel by Jeff VanderMeer .
It is the first in a series of three books called the Southern Reach Trilogy .
The book describes a team of four women ( a biologist , an anthropologist , a psychologist , and a surveyor ) who set out into an area known as Area X.
The area is abandoned and cut off from the rest of civilization .
They are the 12th expedition .
The other expeditions have been fraught with disappearances , suicides , aggressive cancers , and mental trauma .
The novel won the 2014 Nebula Award for Best Novel and the 2014 Shirley Jackson Award for best novel .
A film based on the novel , starring Natalie Portman , was released by Paramount Pictures on February 23 , 2018 .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
The inspiration for Annihilation and the Southern Reach Trilogy was a hike through St. Marks National Wildlife Refuge in northwestern Florida .
Many of the animals and vegetation that VanderMeer has seen on this hike over the past 17 years appear in the novel .
He has said that someday he hopes to do a " Weird Nature " anthology as well .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
A team of four women cross the border into an uninhabited area known as Area X.
The group consists of a biologist , an anthropologist , a psychologist , and a surveyor .
None of the team is ever identified by name .
The story is told through the biologist 's field journal .
They are part of the 12th expedition into Area X , and it is revealed that the biologist 's husband was part of the previous expedition into the same area .
The narrator 's husband returned unexpectedly from the expedition , showing up in their kitchen without any recollection of how he got there .
The rest of his expedition show up similarly .
A few months later , he died of cancer along with the others in the 11th expedition .
After the first night spent at the base camp , the 12th expedition come upon a set of spiral stairs into the ground .
Inside the staircase ( which the biologist repeatedly calls a tower ) , they find cursive writing that begins with the words " Where lies the strangling fruit ...
" The writing appears to consist of a plant material growing several inches from the exterior wall .
While the biologist is examining the writing , she accidentally inhales spores from one of the script - defining growths .
After returning from the tower , the biologist discovers that the psychologist , who is the appointed leader , has programmed the group with certain triggers via hypnosis .
By saying the phrase " consolidation of authority " , the psychologist puts everyone except the biologist immediately into a state of hypnosis .
The biologist believes that the spores she has inhaled have made her immune to the hypnotic suggestions and influence of the psychologist .
The group decides to return to base camp for the night .
At dusk , they hear a moaning noise from far away .
After spending the night at the base camp , the anthropologist is missing the next morning ; the psychologist claims the anthropologist decided to leave and returned to the border .
The group then make their way back to the " tower " where the surveyor and narrator descend back down the stairs while the psychologist stands watch .
Eventually , the surveyor and biologist come upon the body of the anthropologist .
It is believed she came into contact with the writer of the text on the wall ( which the narrator names the Crawler ) .
When the group returns to the top , they find the psychologist missing .
The biologist and surveyor decide to return to the base camp after a fruitless search for the psychologist .
That night the biologist sees a light from the area of a distant lighthouse .
The next day she leaves for the lighthouse while the surveyor stays behind .
At the lighthouse , she finds a pile of journals from past expeditions , indicating that there have been many more expeditions than they had been told .
One of the journals is her husband 's .
The immediately preceding expedition which included her husband was actually " expedition 11k " , with others stretching back to " 11a " , and so on .
She also finds a photograph of what she thinks is the lighthouse keeper from 30 years previously , when Area X had been abandoned .
Near the base of the lighthouse , she finds the psychologist seriously injured .
The psychologist becomes frightened by the biologist 's approach and screams the word " Annihilation " repeatedly , which she later reveals is supposed to induce suicide in the biologist through hypnotic suggestion .
The psychologist also reveals she had leapt from the top of the lighthouse trying to escape an unknown entity .
Before dying , the psychologist tells the narrator that the border is expanding slowly northward .
She also says that the biologist now has started to glow , her body emitting a dim yellow light .
As the biologist returns to base camp , she has a close encounter with the moaning animal she hears every night in the reeds .
She is able to escape , but she is ambushed by the surveyor .
They exchange gunfire .
The biologist manages to outflank and kill the surveyor , but is wounded in the process .
She learns that being injured impedes the process of her " brightening " , but that as she recovers whatever it is continues to take over her body .
Being the only surviving member of their expedition , the biologist takes time to analyse material she found on her way to the lighthouse and realizes that certain moss and decayed " animals " have human cells .
She also finally reads her husband 's journal of his expedition , an all - male team of eight explorers .
The biologist 's husband 's team found the " tower " on their fifth day but did not explore it , moving to the lighthouse first .
After discovering the huge pile of journals , the team of explorers split up with two members choosing to explore the " tower " , four deciding to remain in the lighthouse and the biologist 's husband and his team 's surveyor choosing to explore the land beyond the lighthouse .
Finding that Area X seemed to stretch out indefinitely , they returned to the lighthouse , only to find that their team 's psychologist had been murdered by a beast and then had somehow been resurrected , and the rest of the men had turned on one another .
Returning to the tower , the biologist 's husband and the surveyor were unable to find the other two men .
They later see doppelgängers of all the men ( including themselves ) except the psychologist , entering the tunnel .
At this point the two remaining men decide to abandon their mission .
The surveyor tries to return to the border via the way they crossed ; however , the biologist 's husband decides to repair a boat and try to cross back by following the shore .
Having read her husband 's journal , the biologist decides to return to the tunnel to see if she can find the Crawler .
She makes her way down the spiral staircase and eventually finds the Crawler .
After a nearly fatal encounter , she looks back to see the un - aged face of the lighthouse keeper within it , focused on the writing on the wall .
The book closes with the biologist stating she does not plan to return home .
Instead , she decides to stay in Area X and find perhaps any part of her late husband 's presence , which she believes remains somewhere in Area X. RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The reviews for Annihilation have been generally positive .
Jason Sheehan of National Public Radio described the book as page - turning and suspenseful , saying , " about three hours later , I looked up again with half the book behind me and wondered how I 'd gotten from there to here .
"
Salon.com named it book of the week while GQ Magazine recognized it as one of the top books for the month of February and said that it was " about an intelligent , deadly fungus [ which ] makes for an enthralling read .
"
The Washington Post said that it was " successfully creepy , an old - style gothic horror novel set in a not - too - distant future " while The Daily Telegraph said that it " shows signs of being the novel that will allow VanderMeer to break through to a new and larger audience .
" Entertainment Weekly gave Annihilation a B+ rating .
The novel won the 2014 Nebula Award for Best Novel and the 2014 Shirley Jackson Award for best novel .
FILM ADAPTATION Section::::Film adaptation .
In 2014 , Paramount Pictures acquired rights to the novel , with writer - director Alex Garland set to adapt the script and direct the film .
In May 2015 , Natalie Portman entered into talks to star in the film .
In November 2015 , Jane the Virgin star Gina Rodriguez was in talks to co - star in the film with Portman .
In March 2016 , it was announced that Oscar Isaac would join the cast of the film .
Garland stated to Creative Screenwriting that his adaptation is based on only the first novel of the trilogy , saying , " At the point I started working on Annihilation , there was only one of the three books .
I knew that it was planned as a trilogy by the author , but there was only the manuscript for the first book . "
Location filming by Lighthouse Pictures Ltd occurred , starting in late April 2016 in South Forest , Windsor Great Park .
Lighthouse Pictures has a charge arrangement registered with UK Companies House regarding the matter .
Production was confirmed to begin as David Gyasi was added to the cast .
The teaser trailer for the film premiered in September 2017 , and the film was released on February 23 , 2018 to very positive reviews .
In March 2014 , as part of a piece on VanderMeer and Annihilation , VanderMeer visited the St. Marks Lighthouse that inspired one of the settings in Annihilation .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS