THE MUMMY ( 2017 FILM )
The Mummy is a 2017 American action - adventure film directed by Alex Kurtzman and written by David Koepp , Christopher McQuarrie and Dylan Kussman , with a story by Kurtzman , Jon Spaihts and Jenny Lumet .
It is a reboot of The Mummy franchise and the first installment in Universal 's planned Dark Universe franchise .
The film stars Tom Cruise as a US soldier who accidentally unearths the ancient tomb of an entrapped Egyptian princess ( Sofia Boutella ) .
Annabelle Wallis , Jake Johnson , Courtney B. Vance and Russell Crowe also star .
The Mummy premiered at the State Theatre in Sydney , Australia on May 22 , 2017 , and was theatrically released in the United States on June 9 , 2017 , in 2D , 3D and IMAX
3D.
The film received generally negative reviews from critics .
Despite grossing $ 409 million worldwide , it was labeled a box office bomb given its high production and marketing costs , with projected losses of up to $ 95 million .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1127 A.D. , several English crusader knights bury an Egyptian ruby within the tomb of one of their members .
In present - day London , a construction crew discovers the tomb and a mysterious man is authorized to investigate the site .
In a flashback to the New Kingdom era , Princess Ahmanet is first in line to succeed her father Menehptre until his second wife gives birth to a son .
Determined to claim the throne for herself , Ahmanet summons Set , who agrees to help her if she uses a mystical dagger known as the Dagger of Set to transfer his spirit into a physical form .
After murdering her father , his wife , and their child , Ahmanet attempts to sacrifice her lover to Set but is captured by her father 's priests and condemned to be mummified alive for eternity .
Her sarcophagus is then buried in Mesopotamia and submerged in a pool of mercury to ensure that her monstrous form never escapes .
In present - day Iraq , Sergeant Nick Morton and Corporal Chris Vail , while on Long Range Reconnaissance for the U.S. Army , discover the tomb of Ahmanet after calling in an airstrike on an insurgent stronghold .
Jenny Halsey , an archaeologist who had a one - night stand with Nick and had her map stolen by him , arrives and investigates the tomb , correctly concluding that it is a prison .
After Nick extracts Ahmanet 's sarcophagus from the pool of mercury , Nick 's superior , Colonel Greenway , places it on a transport plane headed to England .
During the flight , Vail becomes possessed by Ahmanet 's power after being bitten by a camel spider while inside the tomb .
After attempting to open the sarcophagus , he stabs Greenway and tries to attack the group , forcing Nick to kill him .
A huge number of crows then assault the plane , causing it to crash and kill everyone on board except for Jenny , who is parachuted off the plane by Nick .
Nick awakens a day later in a morgue , in Oxford , discovering that he has been brought back to life by unknown means and learns from Vail 's sardonic ghost that he has been cursed by Ahmanet , who seeks to use him as a replacement vessel for Set .
Ahmanet 's mummy escapes from the sarcophagus and begins feeding on rescue workers to regenerate her decomposed body .
Turning the workers into zombie minions , she lures Nick and Jenny into a trap , forcing the two to fight off her minions as they unsuccessfully try to escape .
Ahmanet also recovers the Dagger of Set from a reliquary in a nearby church .
At the last moment , however , unknown soldiers appear and subdue Ahmanet .
Their leader , Dr. Henry Jekyll , explains that Jenny is an agent of Prodigium , a secret society dedicated to hunting supernatural threats .
He reveals much of his own history and confirms that Nick was cursed when Ahmanet 's tomb was opened .
Although first welcoming Dr. Jekyll 's help , Nick ( as well as Jenny ) becomes horrified to discover the doctor 's intention to complete the ritual , allowing Set to possess Nick completely , in the belief that this will render Set vulnerable and allow his evil to be ended forever .
Meanwhile , Ahmanet summons a spider to possess a Prodigium technician and frees herself from captivity , wreaking havoc , death , and destruction in the process .
After verbally sparring with Nick , Jekyll succumbs to his own dark impulses and transforms into Edward Hyde , his sadistic and murderous alternate personality , even as Ahmanet wreaks havoc outside , unbeknownst to them .
Nick rebuffs the repulsive Hyde 's offer of an alliance between them , and Hyde attacks him .
However , Nick manages to stop him with the serum Jekyll uses to suppress his evil side .
He and Jenny then escape from Prodigium , but they run into Ahmanet once again .
She steals back the dagger , summons an army of deceased crusaders to serve her , and creates a massive sandstorm that ravages London , with Nick and Jenny narrowly escaping her grasp .
The undead knights slaughter the Prodigium soldiers in the tomb ( discovered during the film 's opening ) and Ahmanet finally recovers the ruby and places it in the dagger 's pommel , granting her all that she needs to free Set aside from Nick himself .
Guided by the spectral Vail , Nick and Jenny flee into the London Underground tunnels , but it is revealed that Vail is still under Ahmanet 's control and they are soon attacked by Ahmanet 's minions .
Ahmanet captures Jenny and drowns her , hoping to break her hold over Nick .
Nick is beaten up by Ahmanet until he gives up and lets Ahmanet embrace him , using it as a ruse to steal the dagger and shatter the ruby .
However , he sees the lifeless Jenny and bets on stabbing himself .
Nick 's body is partially possessed by Set , who proceeds to join Ahmanet to uphold his end of the bargain .
However , looking back at Jenny 's dead body , Nick regains control , using Set 's powers to overpower and suck the life out of Ahmanet .
Once Ahmanet is transformed back into a shriveled mummy , Nick harnesses Set 's powers to resurrect Jenny , saying goodbye before succumbing to Set 's nature and disappearing .
Soon , Jenny regroups with Dr. Jekyll , and they tensely discuss if Nick , now fused with Set in an uncertain way , will use his powers for good , evil , or something else entirely .
Ahmanet 's corpse is lowered into a locked pool of mercury within the Prodigium base for safekeeping .
Meanwhile , in the desert , Nick resurrects Vail , and the two set out on a new adventure .
CAST
* Tom Cruise as Nick Morton , a U.S. Army sergeant who unintentionally unearths the tomb of Princess Ahmanet , unleashing an unspeakable evil .
Nick becomes haunted , fused with , and possessed by Set after Ahmanet puts a curse on him .
* Sofia Boutella as Ahmanet , the title character .
She is loosely based on Imhotep from the original Mummy films , as well as the ancient Egyptian goddess , Amunet .
Once in line to be the queen of Ancient Egypt , Ahmanet murdered her father and his family in order to resurrect Set , an act for which she was cursed for all eternity and buried alive , until she is accidentally freed as the titular Mummy .
* Annabelle Wallis as Jennifer " Jenny " Halsey , an archaeologist who has a past with Nick .
She secretly works for the monster - hunting organization known as Prodigium .
* Jake Johnson as Chris Vail , Nick 's friend and closest ally .
* Courtney B. Vance as Colonel Greenway , Nick and Chris 's superior officer .
* Russell Crowe as Dr. Henry Jekyll , a brilliant scientist who leads Prodigium , an organization dedicated to locating , containing , and when necessary , destroying monsters .
Due to a failed experiment intended to repress his evil side , he must regularly inject himself with a serum to prevent himself from transforming into his evil , monstrous , and psychotic alter - ego , Mr. Edward Hyde .
Section::::Cast .
Additionally , Marwan Kenzari plays Malik , Jekyll 's chief of security and a member of Prodigium .
Javier Botet plays Set , the ancient Egyptian god of death , who aids Princess Ahmanet in her quest to rule Egypt .
Set has a connection with Nick Morton , as the latter is intended to be the human vessel for his resurrection .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Universal Pictures first announced plans for a modern reboot of The Mummy franchise in 2012 .
The project went through multiple directors , with Len Wiseman leaving the project in 2013 , and a second director , Andrés Muschietti , in 2014 .
Tom Cruise began talks about playing the lead in November 2015 , with Sofia Boutella beginning talks that December .
Kurtzman cast Boutella after seeing and being impressed by her largely mute performance in .
Kurtzman noted that " if you look at her eyes , and this is what I got from watching Kingsman , there 's a whole performance going on here .
And in not saying anything but conveying that much to me , I thought oh my god , no matter how much prosthetics we put on her , no matter how much CG we put on her face , if I see this , she 's going to convey something very emotional to me . "
Other casting news was announced between March and May , with Russell Crowe joining during the latter month .
Shortly after the film opened , Variety reported that Cruise had excessive control over the film and firm control of nearly every aspect of production and post - production , including re - writing the script and editing to his specifications , telling Kurtzman how to direct on set , and enlarging his role while downplaying Boutella 's .
Universal contractually guaranteed Cruise control of most aspects of the project , from script approval to post - production decisions .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography on the film began on April 3 , 2016 , in Oxford , United Kingdom , and also took place in Surrey .
Filming on the movie wrapped on July 17 , 2016 , in London .
Production then moved to Namibia for two weeks , with principal photography on the film being completed on August 13 , 2016 .
For the filming of the plane crash the production made use of The Vomit Comet and parabolic flight to simulate the illusion of weightlessness .
The crew did a total of 64 takes with many of the crew becoming sick to their stomachs .
Initially Kurtzman planned to shoot the scene entirely using wires and a rotating set , however Cruise 's insistence changed his mind .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Composer Brian Tyler started work on the music for the movie early , writing about a half hour of music before filming even began .
Working on the film for a year and half , Tyler recorded with an 84-piece orchestra and 32-voice choir at London 's Abbey Road .
He ultimately wrote and recorded over two hours of music , which , given the length of the film ( 107 minutes ) , resulted in a soundtrack album longer than the film itself .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Initially scheduled for a 2016 release , the film was released in the United States and Canada on June 9 , 2017 , with international roll out beginning the same day .
The film was screened in various formats , such as 2D , 3D and IMAX 3D.
On December 20 , 2016 , IMAX released a trailer with the wrong audio track attached ; this unintentionally prompted the creation of memes and video montages featuring the mistakenly included audio track , which was missing most of the sound effects and instead featured Tom Cruise 's grunts and screams .
IMAX reacted by taking down the trailer and issuing DMCA takedown notices in an attempt to stop it from spreading .
Following the 2017 Manchester Arena bombing on May 22 , Universal cancelled the film 's U.K. premiere , which had been scheduled to take place in London on June 1 . VIDEO GAME Section::::Video game .
A video game based on the film , The Mummy Demastered , was released on October 24 , 2017 .
It is a Metroidvania featuring a stand - alone story , which takes place concurrently with the events of the film and follows Prodigium soldiers under the command of Dr. Jekyll who fight the forces of Princess Ahmanet ; unlike the film , it received positive reviews .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The Mummy grossed $ 80.2 million in the United States and Canada and $ 329 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 409.2 million , against a combined production and advertising budget of around $ 345 million .
The film had a worldwide opening of $ 172.4 million , the biggest global debut of Tom Cruise 's career .
UNITED STATES AND CANADA Section::::United States and Canada .
In North America , the film was released alongside
It Comes at Night and Megan Leavey , and was originally projected to gross $ 35–40 million from 4,034 theaters in its opening weekend .
However , after making $ 12 million on its first day ( including $ 2.66 million from Thursday night previews ) , weekend projections were lowered to $ 30 million .
It ended up debuting to $ 31.7 million , marking the lowest of the Mummy franchise and finishing second at the box office behind Wonder Woman ( $ 58.2 million in its second week ) .
Deadline Hollywood attributed the film 's underperformance to poor critic and audience reactions , as well as " blockbuster fatigue .
" In its second weekend the film made $ 14.5 million ( dropping 54.2 % ) , finishing 4th at the box office .
It was pulled from 827 theaters in its third week and made $ 5.8 million , dropping another 60 % and finishing 6th at the box office .
INTERNATIONAL Section::::International .
Outside North America , the film opened in 63 overseas territories , with China , the UK , Mexico , Germany , Ireland , Australia , New Zealand , Brazil and Russia receiving the film the same day as in North America , and was projected to debut to $ 125–135 million .
It opened on June 6 , 2017 in South Korea and grossed $ 6.6 million on its first day , the biggest - ever debut for both Tom Cruise and Universal in the country .
It ended up having a foreign debut of $ 140.7 million , the biggest of Cruise 's career .
In its opening weekend the film made $ 52.4 million in China , $ 7.4 million in Russia , $ 4.9 million in Mexico and $ 4.2 million in the United Kingdom .
As of July 9 , 2017 , The film other big markets are China ( $ 91.5 million ) , South Korea ( $ 26.2 million ) , Russia and the CIS ( $ 15.9 million ) and Brazil ( $ 13.2 million ) .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
The Mummy received generally negative reviews from critics , with criticism aimed at its narrative , tone , acting , and plot points setting up the Dark Universe .
On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 15 % based on 273 reviews , with an average rating of 4.2/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Lacking the campy fun of the franchise 's most recent entries and failing to deliver many monster - movie thrills , The Mummy suggests a speedy unraveling for the Dark Universe .
"
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 34 out of 100 , based on 44 critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B− " on an A+ to F scale , while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave it a 70 % overall positive score .
Vince Mancini of Uproxx gave the film a negative review , writing : " If you like incomprehensible collections of things that vaguely resemble other things you might 've enjoyed in the past , The Mummy is the movie for you . "
IndieWire 's David Ehrlich gave the film a D- , calling it the worst film of Cruise 's career and criticizing its lack of originality , saying : " It 's one thing to excavate the iconography of old Hollywood , it 's another to exploit it .
This is n't filmmaking , it 's tomb - raiding . "
Owen Gleiberman of Variety wrote : " The problem at its heart is that the reality of what the movie is — a Tom Cruise vehicle — is at war with the material .
The actor , at 54 , is still playing that old Cruise trope , the selfish cocky semi - scoundrel who has to grow up . ...
The trouble is that Cruise , at least in a high - powered potboiler like this one , is so devoted to maintaining his image as a clear and wholesome hero that his flirtation with the dark side is almost entirely theoretical . "
Writing for Rolling Stone , Peter Travers gave the film one star out of four , saying : " How meh is The Mummy ?
Let me count the ways .
For all the huffing and puffing and digital desperation from overworked computers , this reboot lands onscreen with a resounding thud . "
Glen Kenny of RogerEbert.com gave the film 1.5/4 stars , writing : I found something almost admirable about the film 's cheek .
It 's amazingly relentless in its naked borrowing from other , better horror and sci - fi movies that I was able to keep occupied making a checklist of the movies referenced .
Entertainment Weeklys Chis Nashawaty wrote that the film " feels derivative and unnecessary and like it was written by committee .
"
In BBC World News Culture , Nicholas Barber calls the film " a mish - mash of wildly varying tones and plot strands , from its convoluted beginning to its shameless non - end .
Tom Cruise 's new film barely qualifies as a film at all .
None of it makes sense .
The film delivers all the chases , explosions , zombies and ghosts you could ask for , and there are a few amusing lines and creepy moments , but , between the headache - inducing flashbacks and hallucinations , the narrative would be easier to follow if it were written in hieroglyphics . "
Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian wrote that the film " has some nice moments but is basically a mess .
The plot sags like an aeon - old decaying limb , a jumble of ideas and scenes from what look like different screenplay drafts .
"
Empire film magazine was more positive , with Dan Jolin awarding the film three stars .
" It 's running and jumping grin - flashing business as usual for Cruise , once more on safe character territory as an Ethan Hunt - esque action protagonist who couples up with a much younger woman , while another woman chases after him , " he wrote .
"
And if the next installment - teasing conclusion is anything to go by , Cruise seemed to have enough fun making this that he may just return for more . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Subject !
Result colspan=2The
Razzie Nominee
So Rotten
You Loved It FUTURE Section::::Future .
The film is part of Universal Pictures ' Dark Universe , an attempt to create a modern cinematic universe based on the classic Universal Monsters film series .
A remake of Bride of Frankenstein was originally scheduled for release on February 14 , 2019 , but on October 5 , 2017 , Universal decided to postpone it to allow more work to be done on the script .
The 2014 film Dracula Untold was originally considered to be the first film in the series ; however , since the film 's release , the connection to Dark Universe was downplayed , and The Mummy was re - positioned as the first film in the series .
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS