OVER
THE GARDEN WALL Over the Garden Wall is an American animated television miniseries created by Patrick McHale for Cartoon Network .
The series centers on two half - brothers who travel across a strange forest in order to find their way home , encountering odd and wonderful things on their journey .
The show is based on McHale 's animated short film Tome of the Unknown , which was produced as part of Cartoon Network Studios ' shorts development program .
The show features Elijah Wood and Collin Dean as the protagonists Wirt and Greg , and Melanie Lynskey as a bluebird named Beatrice .
Over the Garden Wall was broadcast throughout the week of November 3 , 2014 to November 7 , 2014 .
The show marked the first miniseries on the network , which commenced its production in March 2014 .
McHale first envisioned the show in 2004 , and pitched it to the network in 2006 .
After working on other Cartoon Network shows including The Marvelous Misadventures of Flapjack and Adventure Time , the network expressed interest in McHale pitching a pilot .
That pilot became the catalyst for Over the Garden Wall .
Production of the show was largely handled in Burbank , California , but many of the show 's storyboard artists worked from other U.S. cities , while the program 's animation was outsourced to South Korea .
The series ' environment evokes 19th- and 20th - century Americana , while its digital backgrounds are designed to resemble grisaille paintings .
Upon its debut , the series received critical acclaim from television critics , with praise focusing on its mood and characters .
In 2015 , the series won an Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program .
Outside of the series , a one - shot comic book adaptation penned by McHale has been produced , with four further issues commissioned .
This was eventually expanded into an ongoing series .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The series follows two half - brothers , Wirt and Greg ( voiced by Elijah Wood and Collin Dean respectively ) , who become lost in a strange forest called the Unknown .
In order to find their way home , the two must travel across the seemingly supernatural forest with the occasional help of the wandering , mysterious and elderly Woodsman ( Christopher Lloyd ) and Beatrice ( Melanie Lynskey ) , an irritable bluebird who travels with the boys in order to find a woman called Adelaide , who can supposedly undo the curse on Beatrice and her family and show the half - brothers the way home .
Wirt , the older brother , is a worry - prone teenager who would rather keep to himself than have to make a decision .
His three passions are the clarinet , poetry , and interior design , but he keeps this private out of fear of being mocked .
On the other hand , Greg , the younger brother , is all about play and being carefree , much to Wirt 's chagrin and the danger to himself and others .
Greg carries a frog ( Jack Jones ) , whose name is undetermined and who can communicate only through singing .
Stalking the main cast is the Beast ( Samuel Ramey ) , an ancient creature who leads lost souls astray until they lose their hope and willpower and turn into " Edelwood trees " .
FINAL CHAPTERS Section::::Final chapters .
In the final two episodes , it is revealed that Wirt and Greg are actually from the modern era .
Wirt and Greg 's strange appearance stems from the fact that the night they entered the Unknown was Halloween .
Wirt , attempting to take back an embarrassing poetry tape he made for a girl he likes , had followed her to a graveyard scary story gathering before a police officer scared him and Greg into jumping over the cemetery 's garden wall .
On the other side of the wall , they landed on train tracks where Greg was almost hit by a train .
Wirt pushed them both off a hill into a lake / river in an attempt to save him , knocking them both unconscious in the process and sending them to a Limbo - like realm between life and death .
At the end of the last episode , Wirt and Greg wake up in a hospital , with Greg telling a story before being cut off .
As the scene ends , Greg 's frog begins to glow , due to having eaten a magic bell in the Unknown , suggesting that there was at least some physical aspect to the story .
The series ends with a slow montage of how Wirt and Greg affected the inhabitants of the Unknown .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Over the Garden Wall was first envisioned in 2004 with a scarier and more adventure - based storyline .
Before working as a storyboard artist on The Marvelous Misadventures of Flapjack , artist Patrick McHale pitched the show in 2006 , then known under the title Tome of the Unknown .
The series would follow two brothers — Walter and Gregory — who , after signing themselves into a Faustian deal with a devil named Old Scratch , journey across the Land of the In - Between to track down the pages of a book of forgotten stories .
McHale saw it as " a possible Halloween special " , but had trouble adapting the premise with a larger story arc .
After his work for Flapjack , McHale moved on to co - develop Adventure Time , where he served as creative director , and subsequently as a writer .
The network later asked him if he had interest in developing a pilot , which led to him returning to Tome of the Unknown , polishing it and pitching it again to the network .
After creating a pilot episode , , McHale and the network settled upon the miniseries format for the ensuing series , as McHale felt that it would lead to " something that felt higher quality than what we could do with a regular series " .
McHale abandoned the original idea centered around chapters of a mystical tome and
the series ' title became Over the Garden Wall .
Production for Over the Garden Wall commenced in March 2014 .
McHale initially envisioned eighteen chapters in the series , but the episode count was brought to ten to accommodate budget and time constraints .
Early drafts of episodes from the show 's pitch bible included a skinless witch character and a villain who carves dice from the bones of kidnapped children , as well a running plot throughout four episodes in which Wirt and Gregory are transformed into animals ( Gregory being a duck and Wirt being " either a bear or a dog ...
Nobody can tell which " ) .
The ten episodes marked the first miniseries on the Cartoon Network .
The show features Wood and Dean ( reprising their roles from the short ) , along with Lynskey as the main voice cast .
McHale and his crew tried to maintain a balance between frightening imagery and " episodes that are just light and funny " .
For the music , McHale drew inspiration from " classic American , opera singing " .
Nick Cross served as art director and Nate Cash as supervising director ; both worked with McHale alongside storyboard artists located in New York and Chicago .
This distance proved difficult for McHale , who found it " particularly daunting considering the idiosyncratic nature of the production " .
The series ' art was inspired by a variety of sources , including the 1890s McLoughlin Brothers board game Game of Frog Pond , illustrations by Gustave Doré for Cervantes 's Don Quixote , old illustrations for the Hans Christian Andersen story " The Tinderbox " , the Cheshire Cat illustration by John Tenniel from Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland , and the " Dogville Comedies " short films .
McHale referenced chromolithography , vintage Halloween postcards , magic lantern slides , and photographs of New England foliage to create the show 's style .
CAST MAIN VOICES
* Elijah Wood as Wirt * Collin Dean as Gregory ( Greg ) * Melanie Lynskey as Beatrice * Christopher Lloyd as the Woodsman
* Jack Jones as Greg 's Frog
* Samuel Ramey as the Beast VARIOUS VOICES
* Emily Brundige as Sara * Mark Bodnar as the North Wind
* John Cleese as Quincy Endicott ; Adelaide * Tim Curry as Auntie Whispers * Noureen DeWulf as Pumpkin Gal * Frank Fairfield as the Toy Maker * Chris Isaak as Enoch * Shirley Jones as Beatrice 's Mother
* Janet Klein as Miss Langtree * Thomas Lennon as Jimmy Brown * Sam Marin as Mr. Langtree * Judah Nelson as the Cloud City Reception Committee
* Bebe Neuwirth as Margueritte Grey
* Jerron " Blind Boy " Paxton as the Highwayman * Cole Sanchez as Jason Funderberker
* Shannyn Sossamon as Lorna
* Fred Stoller as Fred the Horse * Deborah Voigt as Queen of the Clouds * Audrey Wasilewski as the Tavern Keeper EPISODES
PILOT ( 2013 )
Section::::Pilot ( 2013 ) .
MINISERIES ( 2014 )
Section::::Miniseries ( 2014 ) .
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
McHale 's original short , Tome of the Unknown , was screened at the 2014 Santa Barbara International Film Festival , where McHale earned the Bruce Corwin Award for best animated short film .
It also received an honorable mention at the 2013 Ottawa International Animation Festival .
At the 2014 San Diego Comic - Con International , a preview of the show was screened along with various panels for other shows on the network .
Episode 2 was previewed at the 2014 New York Comic Con , which McHale and the main cast attended .
The show made its premiere on November 3 , 2014 on Cartoon Network , and ran over five consecutive nights .
The entirety of it was published on iTunes preceding its broadcast .
The series aired on Cartoon Network in Australia from December 15 to 19 , 2014 and on Cartoon Network in the United Kingdom and Ireland from April 6 to 10 , 2015 . MUSIC Section::::Music .
Various melodies and songs based on pre-1950s music are heard throughout the series .
Elijah Wood , the voice actor for Wirt , has said that " if this show were a record , it would be played on a phonograph " .
Songs from the series include " Into the Unknown " , its title song , composed by Patrick McHale and sung by Jack Jones ; " A Courting Song " , composed by the Petrojvic Blasting Company and performed by Frank Fairfield ; and " Come Wayward Souls " , sung by Samuel Ramey as the Beast .
The majority of the series ' songs have been officially uploaded to YouTube .
On the DVD release they can be heard , along with visuals and without dialogue , in a special feature known as the Composer 's Cut .
An extended version of the soundtrack , featuring 32 tracks and totaling around 44 minutes in length , was released in the form of a 180 gram vinyl record by Mondo in August 2016 .
The extended soundtrack debuted at the San Diego Comic - Con , with a limited 1,000 copies , featuring a cover designed by Sam Wolfe Connelly .
The extended vinyl is also available as a webstore exclusive from Mondo .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The animated miniseries was released on DVD in the United States on September 8 , 2015 from Cartoon Network and Warner Home Video .
Two months earlier , on July 8 , 2015 the DVD was released in Australia .
The DVD features all ten episodes of the show , commentaries , the original pilot , alternate title cards , and deleted animatics .
Other extras on the DVD include the Composer 's Cut , an option wherein a viewer can watch the show with only the visuals and the background music ; and the mini - documentary Behind Over the Garden Wall .
On April 6 , 2016 , Madman Entertainment released the miniseries on Blu - ray exclusively in Australia and New Zealand with the same bonus content as the DVD release .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
Over the Garden Wall was critically acclaimed .
Preceding its premiere , Patrick Kevin Day of the Los Angeles Times called it " funny , creepy " and , from the premise , " not as simple as it sounds " .
In TV Guide and also before the premiere , Megan Walsh - Boyle felt that the show 's fictional universe " sounds like a world worth getting lost in " .
Meredith Woerner of io9 called a preview of the show " amazing " , " weird , and cute and great " , reflecting " all the things we love about this oddball animation renaissance we are currently living in " .
Conversely , Amid Amidi of Cartoon Brew judged from the same preview that the animation was lacking .
While not discounting its storytelling , music , and production design , he felt that production skimped on animation ; he was still looking forward to the series .
Robert Lloyd of the Los Angeles Times wrote that it was " a little too folksy and fairy story " at times , but that its " contemporary strangeness wins out " , and concluded that " it is throughout something to behold " .
Lloyd later wrote that it evoked " a kind of artisanal quality " , both in its design and setting , and though the writing felt " a little too intent on its own folksiness " , it became more enjoyable throughout .
In the New York Times , Mike Hale also felt the writing was sometimes weak and the stories " perilously thin " , but concluded that McHale developed an environment worth visiting .
Brian Moylan of The Guardian wrote that the visuals were " absolutely stunning " , and that the stories contained " a certain darkness to it that is both mellow and twee at the same time , with a fair amount of anxiety creeping around the edges " .
Brian Lowry of Variety wrote that Garden Wall was " an admirable experiment " , but not one to sustain " the five - night commitment " , calling it " slightly mismatched " while praising a departure from " the more abrasive characteristic " of the network 's primetime content .
Kevin McDonough of the Illinois Daily Journal criticized some of the writing , but summed it up as " an ambitious cartoon " for both younger and older audiences .
Jason Bree of the website Agents of Geek called the miniseries " the greatest thing Cartoon Network has ever produced " .
Kevin Johnson , writing for The A.V. Club , praised the series , giving it an A , saying that " with such a perfect blend of mood , atmosphere , story , and characterization , Over the Garden Walls 10-episode run will leave you wanting more , but like every great fairy tale , it 's a story that knows when it 's over . "
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
! scope="col " Year ! scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Category ! scope="col " Nominee ! scope="col "
Result
COMIC BOOK ADAPTATION Section::::Comic book adaptation .
A one - shot comic book adaptation of the show was announced in October 2014 .
Produced by KaBoom ! , an imprint of Boom !
Studios , the comic was released on November 5 , 2014 .
The comic was supervised by McHale and was produced as an oversized special .
The comic was illustrated by Jim Campbell , a writer / storyboard artist on the television series .
A special variant cover , by McHale , was also released .
The success of the standalone comic led to further issues being commissioned in May 2015 and began to be released in August 2015 .
According to Patrick McHale , the comic books would be similar to the one - shot comic , detailing the events that occurred in between certain episodes and will expand on the miniseries .
The success of the series of one - shots led to an ongoing series of comics , serving as both a sequel and prequel to the series , rather than telling adventures that happened between episodes .
The stories are told parallel , with half the comic detailing Greg returning to mysterious dreamlands in his sleep .
The other half chronicles the Woodsman 's daughter , Anna , and how she became lost in the Unknown .
A new graphic novel that will be released on November 21 will focus on Wirt and Greg discovering that Beatrice came back with them to the real world , but not all is as it seems .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS