THE AGE OF ADALINE
The Age of Adaline is a 2015 American romantic fantasy film directed by Lee Toland Krieger and written by J. Mills Goodloe and Salvador Paskowitz .
The film stars Blake Lively in the title role , with Michiel Huisman , Kathy Baker , Amanda Crew , Harrison Ford , and Ellen Burstyn in supporting roles .
Narrated by Hugh Ross , the story follows Adaline Bowman , a young woman who stops aging after an accident at the age of 29 .
The film was co - produced by Sidney Kimmel Entertainment and Lakeshore Entertainment .
In October 2013 , Lively was cast as the title character , with Krieger attached to direct .
Principal photography took place in Vancouver from March 5 , 2014 to May 5 .
The Age of Adaline premiered in New York City on April 19 , 2015 was theatrically released on April 24 in the United States by Lionsgate .
The film received mixed reviews from critics , with many praising the performances of Lively and Ford respectively and was frequently cited as some of their best work in recent years .
It was a modest box - office success , grossing $ 65.7 million worldwide on a $ 25 million budget .
The film received two nominations at the 42nd Saturn Awards , one for Best Fantasy Film and one for Lively for Best Actress .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
One afternoon in San Francisco , Adaline Bowman purchases fake IDs at an apartment before returning home to feed her dog .
She then goes to work and opens a box of film reels , which highlight historical events and times .
A voiceover ties together the film reels explaining the story of Adaline 's life so far .
She was born on New Years Day 1908 , then later married and gave birth to a daughter , only to become a widow after her husband died in a tragic accident .
Years later , in 1937 , Adaline crashed her car when she swerved into a ravine during a snowstorm and died in the freezing lake nearby , but a lightning strike suddenly revived her .
From that moment on , Adaline has stayed physically 29 years old .
One night , two suspicious FBI agents attempt to force her onto an airplane for study , but she escapes captivity and realizes that she will have to spend the rest of her life on the run .
Ever since , she has changed her identification and address according to the era , while her daughter Flemming ages normally , to the point where she appears older than Adaline .
On New Year 's Eve in the present year , she attends a party where she meets Ellis Jones , introducing herself as her current alias , Jennifer .
He asks to see her again but she refuses , knowing she can never fall in love because she can never have a normal future with someone .
The next day at work , Ellis arrives and again asks Adaline to go on a date with him .
Finally she accepts .
In a flashback , Adaline is shown pulling up in a cab to a park where a man is waiting , holding an engagement ring .
Scared , she asks the cab driver to keep going .
Back in the present day , Adaline 's dog falls ill and she begins to ignore Ellis ' calls .
He shows up at her apartment but she pushes him away , only to have a change of heart while looking through some old photographs and realizing she does n't want to live the same year a hundred times without having a natural life .
They later resolve their argument and Ellis asks Adaline to attend the party at his parents ' house celebrating his parents ' fortieth anniversary , and she says yes .
Upon their arrival , Ellis introduces her to his father , William , who recognizes her instantly and calls her Adaline .
She appears to recognize him , too , but lies , telling him that Adaline was her mother , who has since died .
A flashback shows how they met and came to be in love , soon revealing that he was the man with the engagement ring she stood up that afternoon .
One night , Ellis tells Adaline he is falling in love with her
and she is unsure of how to react .
The following day , Adaline talks with William outside and he notices a scar on her left hand , and becomes shaken .
Another flashback reveals that Adaline cut her hand while they were hiking decades ago and he had stitched it up himself .
He realizes that she is truly Adaline and confronts her .
She becomes upset , saying she used to be " normal " and does n't know what changed her .
He begs her not to run , for Ellis ' sake , but she says she does n't know how to stay .
She flees and returns to the house , writing a note to Ellis while he showers , then she packs her things and leaves .
Moments later , Ellis finds the letter and confronts his father , who refuses to explain .
While driving home , Adaline thinks of all the times she has run and suddenly has a change of heart about the way she lives her life .
She stops and calls her daughter to tell her she is going to stop running .
As she turns the car around , a tow truck plows into her in a hit - and - run accident , leaving her to die .
Freezing and helpless , Adaline dies again .
An ambulance arrives and she is revived by the electricity of the defibrillator .
Later in the hospital , she wakes up to Ellis , and the two profess their love for one another .
Adaline then tells him of her 107 years of life .
One year later , Ellis and Adaline are going to a New Year 's Eve party .
As she is leaving , she notices something strange in the hallway mirror : her first grey hair , proving she has begun to age naturally again .
When Ellis asks if she is okay , she responds : " Yes ... Perfect . "
CAST
* Blake Lively as Adaline Bowman / Jennifer " Jenny " Larson * Michiel Huisman as Ellis Jones * Harrison Ford as William Jones * Anthony Ingruber as young William * Ellen Burstyn as Flemming Prescott * Izabel Pearce as Young Flemming * Kathy Baker as Kathy Jones * Amanda Crew as Kikki Jones * Lynda Boyd as Regan
* Anjali Jay as Cora
* Richard Harmon as Tony
* Mark Ghanimé as Caleb * Barclay Hope as Stanley Chesterfield
* Chris William Martin as Dale Davenport * Hiro Kanagawa as Kenneth * Lane Edwards as Dr. Larry Levyne
* Peter J. Gray as Clarence James
* Jane Craven as Miriam Prescott PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On May 12 , 2010 it was announced that The Age of Adaline would be co - financed and co - produced by Lakeshore Entertainment and Sidney Kimmel Entertainment .
Salvador Paskowitz and J. Mills Goodloe wrote the script .
Sierra / Affinity has the international rights , while producers were Steve Golin , Alix Madigan , Tom Rosenberg and Gary Lucchesi .
On July 20 , 2010 it was reported that Andy Tennant was set to direct the film .
On October 31 , 2010 , Summit Entertainment bought the US distribution rights to the film , which was set to begin shooting in March 2011 for an early 2012 release .
On February 22 , 2011 , it was reported that Gabriele Muccino was in talks to direct the film , replacing Tennant , with the film re - titled from The Age of Adaline to simply Adaline .
On May 14 , 2012 , it was announced that Spanish director Isabel Coixet would direct the film instead .
On October 16 , 2013 , Lee Toland Krieger was reported to be the actual director of the film .
Producer Dan Cohen had shown him the script at a general meeting in 2009 .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
On May 12 , 2010 , Katherine Heigl was cast as the title character .
On November 12 , 2010 , Angela Lansbury was added to the cast of the film , set to play the daughter of the ageless Adaline .
On November 15 , Heigl withdrew from Adaline 's cast , and there were rumors that she had been fired by Lakeshore , which both Lakeshore and Heigl denied .
She later announced that her withdrawal was a result of her recent adoption of a daughter .
On August 15 , 2011 , TheWrap reported that Natalie Portman had been offered the lead role .
On August 25 , Portman told Entertainment Weekly that she had declined the offer .
On October 16 , 2013 , Blake Lively and Ellen Burstyn were cast in the film to play the lead roles , with Lively starring as the title character .
On January 15 , 2014 Harrison Ford joined the cast , and the film was set to begin shooting in March of that year .
On February 11 , 2014 Michiel Huisman joined the cast to star opposite Lively as Adaline 's love interest .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Filming began on March 10 , 2014 in Vancouver and continued through May 5 .
On March 11 , 2014 filming at the Hotel Vancouver commenced .
Anamorphic lenses and minimal use of steadicams were employed to provide greater authenticity for scenes set in the 1930s , 1940s , and 1950s .
The films Gentlemen Prefer Blondes and How to Marry a Millionaire served as inspiration for the period color tone and saturation . MUSIC Section::::Music .
While Rob Simonsen scored the film , Lana Del Rey contributed a song titled " Life Is Beautiful " .
The song is featured in the film 's trailer but is not included in the soundtrack .
RELEASE Section::::Release .
On August 15 , 2014 , Lionsgate set the film for a January 23 , 2015 worldwide release .
Later , the date was moved to April 24 , 2015 .
The film was released on DVD on September 8 , 2015 .
MARKETING Section::::Marketing .
The promotional campaign was aimed primarily at fashion - conscious women .
Danielle DePalma , executive vice - president of digital marketing at Lionsgate , said , " We were very aware of Blake 's high - fashion profile when we crafted the campaign , and there was so much beautiful imagery from the film .
" They created vignettes for MTV and VH1 and a fashion segment for E ! News showing viewers how to achieve the same looks as Lively .
They created a custom " Fashion Journey Through the Decades " initiative , through which a fashion influencer from YouTube or Maker Studios created a unique look inspired by the film .
Video ads were also released on Instagram and tutorials on Pinterest .
Advance screenings for fashion and lifestyle influencers took place in partnership with Gilt City .
The application Periscope was used to spread information about the film .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The Age of Adaline earned $ 42,629,776 in North America and $ 23,033,500 in other countries , for a worldwide box office gross of $ 65.7 million .
The film opened with $ 575,000 during Thursday late - night showings at 2,100 U.S. theaters .
It finished the weekend at number three behind Furious 7 and with $ 13.4 million from 2,991 locations .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
The Age of Adaline has received mixed reviews from critics , although the performances of Blake Lively and Harrison Ford received very positive reviews and were cited as some of their best work in recent years .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a rating of 56 % , based on 150 reviews , with an average rating of 5.5/10 .
The site 's consensus reads " The Age of Adaline ruminates on mortality less compellingly than similarly themed films , but is set apart by memorable performances from Blake Lively and Harrison Ford . "
On Metacritic , the film has a score of 51 out of 100 , based on 32 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
In CinemaScore polls conducted during the opening weekend , cinema audiences gave The Age of Adaline an average grade of " A− " on an A+ to F scale .
Matt Zoller Seitz of RogerEbert.com gave the film three out of four stars , expressing surprise at the film 's increase in quality midway through : " I 've never seen a less involving movie become so compelling at the exact moment when you 've resigned to write it off as just okay .
"
He also gave high praise to Harrison Ford 's dramatic performance , writing that " Ford 's voice — always deep , lowered an octave by age and one more by William 's longing — is even more powerful [ than the devastating look on his face ] .
This is Ford 's best performance since The Fugitive , maybe since Witness " .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Award !
Category !
Recipient(s ) !
Result ! Ref(s )
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS