ASSAULT WEAPONS LEGISLATION IN THE UNITED STATES Assault weapons legislation in the United States refers to bills and laws ( active , expired , proposed or failed ) that define and restrict or make illegal the manufacture , transfer , and possession of assault weapons .
How these firearms are defined and regulated varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction .
The Federal Assault Weapons Ban enacted in 1994 expired in 2004 .
Attempts to renew this ban have failed , as have attempts to pass a new ban , such as the Assault Weapons Ban of 2013 ( AWB 2013 ) .
Seven U.S. states have assault weapons bans : three were enacted before the 1994 federal ban and four more passed before the federal ban expired .
The majority of states , forty - three , have no assault weapons ban , although two , Minnesota and Virginia , have training and background check requirements for purchasers of assault weapons that are more stringent than those for ordinary firearms .
While there are no statewide assault weapon bans in Colorado and Illinois , local bans exist in certain cities or counties in each of these states .
In 2018 , most Americans supported a ban on assault weapons , according to polls .
The 1994 federal and 1989 state ban in California were prompted by the 1989 Cleveland Elementary School shooting in Stockton , California .
Existing and proposed weapon bans come under renewed interest in the wake of mass shootings , most recently after the December 2012 Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting in Newtown , Connecticut .
In addition to state bans , Washington , D.C. and some U.S. counties and municipalities have assault weapons laws .
FEDERAL ASSAULT WEAPONS BANS EXPIRED ASSAULT WEAPONS BAN OF 1994 Section::::Federal assault weapons bans .
Section::::Expired Assault Weapons Ban of 1994 .
In January 1989 34 children and a teacher were shot in Stockton California .
The gunman used a semi - automatic AK-47 assault weapon ; five children died .
President George H.W. Bush banned the import of semi automatic rifles in March 1989 , and made the ban permanent in July 1989 .
The assault weapons ban tried to address public concern about mass shootings while limiting the impact on recreational firearms use .
In November 1993 the ban passed the United States Senate .
The author of the ban , Dianne Feinstein D - CA , and other advocates said that it was a weakened version of the original proposal .
In January 1994 Josh Sugarmann , executive director of the Violence Policy Center , said handguns and assault weapons should be banned .
In May of that year former presidents Gerald Ford , Jimmy Carter , and Ronald Reagan wrote to the United States House of Representatives in support of banning " semi - automatic assault guns .
" They cited a 1993 CNN / USA Today / Gallup Poll that found 77 percent of Americans supported a ban on the manufacture , sale , and possession of such weapons .
Rep. Jack Brooks , D - TX , then chair of the House Judiciary Committee , tried to remove the ban from the crime bill but failed .
The Public Safety and Recreational Firearms Use Protection Act , commonly called the federal Assault Weapons Ban ( AWB and AWB 1994 ) , was enacted in September 1994 .
The ban , including a ban on high - capacity magazines , became defunct ( expired ) in September 2004 per a 10-year sunset provision .
PROPOSED FEDERAL ASSAULT WEAPONS BANS PROPOSED ASSAULT WEAPONS BAN OF 2015 Section::::Proposed federal assault weapons bans .
Section::::Proposed Assault Weapons Ban of 2015 .
The proposed bill H.R.4269 , the Assault Weapons Ban of 2015 , was introduced on December 16 of 2015 to the 114th United States Congress , sponsored by Representative David N. Cicilline of Rhode Island along with 123 original co - sponsors , it currently has 149 co - sponsors , This legislation states that its purpose is " To regulate assault weapons , to ensure that the right to keep and bear arms is not unlimited , and for other purposes . "
The proposed legislation targets various firearm accessories , including the barrel shroud ( a safety covering for the barrel of the firearm to prevent the operator from burning his or her hands as the barrel becomes heated after the firing of multiple rounds ) , pistol grip , and certain types of firearm stocks such as telescoping or collapsing stocks .
Also included are lists of various classes and models of firearms , including semi - automatic firearms , AR-15 style rifles , assault weapons , semi - automatic pistols , semi - automatic shotguns , and others , some of which have already been banned or restricted under existing legislation including grenade launchers .
The legislation also proscribes high - capacity magazines .
STATE ASSAULT WEAPON BANS Section::::State assault weapon bans .
Three U.S. states passed assault weapons bans before Congress passed the federal Assault Weapons Ban of 1994 :
California in 1989 , New Jersey in 1990 , and Connecticut in 1993 .
Four others passed assault weapons bans before AWB 1994 expired in 2004 : Hawaii , Maryland , Massachusetts and New York .
CALIFORNIA 1989 Section::::California .
Section::::1989 .
In May 1989 , California became the first state in the U.S. to pass an assault weapons ban , after the January 1989 Cleveland Elementary School shooting in Stockton .
The Roberti - Roos Assault Weapons Control Act of 1989 , or AWCA , banned semi - automatic firearms that it classified as assault weapons : over 50 specific brands and models of rifles , pistols , and shotguns .
It also banned magazines that it classified as large capacity ( those able to hold more than 10 rounds of ammunition ) .
Guns and magazines legally owned at the time the law was passed were grandfathered in if registered with the California Department of Justice .
1999
Section::::1999 .
In March 1999 , State Senator Don Perata introduced Senate Bill 23 ( SB 23 ) .
The bill had three provisions : to make illegal the manufacture , importation , sale or offer , or to give or lend any large - capacity magazine as defined as having the capacity to accept more than ten rounds ; the addition of a " generic " definition list to the existing Roberti - Roos legislation ; and the exemption to allow on and off duty and retired peace officers the use of assault weapons .
They are defined in Penal Code § 12276.1 and § 30515 .
The bill was passed and went into effect on January 1 , 2000 .
CONNECTICUT Section::::Connecticut .
In June 1993 , Connecticut became the third U.S. state , after California and New Jersey , to pass an assault weapons ban .
In April 2013 , four months after the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting , the Connecticut General Assembly passed new restrictions to the state 's existing assault weapons ban .
The law was challenged , but a federal judge upheld it and ruled it constitutional .
Gun owners said they would appeal .
Connecticut prohibits any person from possessing an assault weapon unless the weapon was possessed prior to July 1 , 1994 , and the possessor :
* Was eligible to apply for a certificate of possession for the assault weapon by July 1 , 1994 ; *
Lawfully possessed the assault weapon prior to October 1 , 1993 ; and * Is not in violation of Connecticut General Statutes § § 53 - 202a to 53 - 202k ( assault weapon regulations ) , and Connecticut General Statutes § 53 - 202o ( affirmative defense in prosecution for possession of specified assault weapon ) .
It also prohibits any person from distributing , transporting , importing into the state , keeping , offering or exposing for sale , or giving an assault weapon to any person .
Connecticut defines an " assault weapon " as : *
Any " selective - fire " firearm capable of fully automatic , semi - automatic or " burst fire " at the option of the user ; * Any semi - automatic centerfire rifle , regardless of the date produced , that has the ability to accept a detachable magazine and has at least one of the following features : 1 )
A folding or telescoping stock ; 2 )
Any grip of the weapon , including a pistol grip , thumbhole stock , or other stock that would allow an individual to grip the weapon , resulting in any finger on the trigger hand in addition to the trigger finger being directly below any portion of the action of the weapon when firing ; 3 )
A forward pistol grip ; 4 )
A flash suppressor ; or 5 )
A grenade or flare launcher ; * A semi - automatic pistol that has an ability to accept a detachable magazine and has at least one of the following features : 1 )
The ability to accept a detachable ammunition magazine that attaches at some location outside the pistol grip ; 2 ) A threaded barrel capable of accepting a flash suppressor , forward pistol grip or silencer ; 3 ) A shroud that is attached to , or partially or completely encircles , the barrel and that permits the shooter to hold the firearm without being burned ( except a slide that encloses the barrel ) ; or 4 ) A second hand grip ; * A semi - automatic shotgun that has both of the following features : 1 ) A folding or telescoping stock ; or 2 )
Any grip of the weapon , including a pistol grip , a thumbhole stock , or any other stock , the use of which would allow an individual to grip the weapon , resulting in any finger on the trigger hand in addition to the trigger finger being directly below any portion of the action of the weapon when firing ; * A semiautomatic , centerfire rifle that has : 1 ) a fixed magazine that can accept more than 10 rounds of ammunition ; or 2 ) an overall length of less than 30 inches ; * A semiautomatic pistol with a fixed magazine that has the ability to accept more than 10 rounds of ammunition ; * A semiautomatic shotgun that can accept a detachable magazine ; or * A shotgun with a revolving cylinder .
Connecticut also bans listed makes and models of semiautomatic firearms and copies of those firearms .
Grandfather clauses and other exceptions apply , depending .
HAWAII Section::::Hawaii .
Hawaiian law bans the manufacture , possession , sale or other transfer of what it defines as assault pistols .
Hawaii defines an " assault pistol " as a semiautomatic handgun that accepts a detachable magazine and that has two or more of : * An ammunition magazine that attaches to the pistol outside of the pistol grip ; *
A threaded barrel capable of accepting a barrel extender , flash suppressor , forward hand grip , or silencer ; * A shroud that is attached to or partially or completely encircles the barrel and that permits the shooter to hold the firearm with the second hand without being burned ;
* A manufactured weight of 50 ounces or more when the pistol is unloaded ; * A centerfire pistol with an overall length of 12 inches or more ; or * A semiautomatic version of an automatic firearm .
In tandem with the assault pistol ban is a law that bans the manufacture , possession , sale or other transfer of detachable ammunition magazines with capacities greater than 10 rounds that are capable of use with a pistol .
MARYLAND
Section::::Maryland .
Maryland law prohibits the possession , sale , transfer , purchase , receipt , or transportation into the state of assault weapons defined as assault pistols and assault long guns .
Maryland 's definition of an " assault long gun " includes a list of 45 specific firearms or their copies , with certain variations .
Maryland 's definition of an " assault pistol " includes a list of 15 specific firearms or their copies , with certain variations .
Maryland also defines an assault weapon " copycat weapon " as : * A semiautomatic centerfire rifle that can accept a detachable magazine and has any two of the following : a folding stock ; a grenade or flare launcher ; or a flash suppressor ; * A semiauto centerfire rifle that has a fixed magazine with the capacity to accept more than 10 rounds ; * A semiauto centerfire rifle that has an overall length of less than 29 inches ; * A semiauto pistol with a fixed magazine that can accept more than 10 rounds ; * A semiauto shotgun that has a folding stock ; or * A shotgun with a revolving cylinder .
In tandem with the assault weapons ban is a law that bans the manufacture , sale or other transfer of detachable magazines with capacities greater than 20 rounds .
The United States Supreme Court refused to hear a challenge to the Maryland ban in November 2017 .
The U.S. Court of Appeals for the 4th Circuit in Richmond had upheld the ban , stating that : " [ A]ssault weapons and large - capacity magazines are not protected by the Second Amendment .
"
Attorneys general in 21 states and the NRA had asked the Supreme Court to hear the case .
MASSACHUSETTS Section::::Massachusetts .
Massachusetts law bans the sale , transfer , or possession of assault weapons not otherwise lawfully possessed on September 13 , 1994 .
Massachusetts defines " assault weapon " by the definition of " semiautomatic assault weapon " in the federal assault weapons ban of 1994 .
That definition included : * A list of firearms by name and copies of those firearms ; * Semi - automatic rifles and pistols capable of accepting a detachable magazine and having at least two specified characteristics ; and * Semi - automatic shotguns having at least two specified characteristics .
In tandem with the assault weapons ban is a law that bans the sale , transfer , or possession of a large capacity feeding device unless such device was lawfully possessed on September 13 , 1994 .
The definition of " large capacity feeding device " included : a fixed or detachable magazine , box , drum , feed strip or similar device capable of accepting , or that can be readily converted to accept , more than 10 rounds of ammunition or more than 5 shotgun shells ; or a large capacity ammunition feeding device as defined in the federal assault weapons ban of 1994 .
NEW JERSEY Section::::New Jersey .
In May 1990 , New Jersey became the second state in the U.S. to pass an assault weapons ban , after California .
At the time , it was the toughest assault weapons ban in the nation .
AR-15 semi - automatic rifles are illegal in New Jersey , and owning and publicly carrying other guns require separate licensing processes .
Although it is commonly referred to as an assault weapons ban , New Jersey 's law actually uses the term " assault firearm " to define banned and regulated guns .
Some New Jersey gun advocates have called its laws " draconian . "
Attorney Evan Nappen , author of several books on New Jersey gun laws , says the term is " misapplied and carries with it a pejorative meaning . "
NEW YORK Section::::New York .
New York law bans the manufacture , transport , disposal or possession of an assault weapon in the state .
It defines an " assault weapon " as : * A semi - automatic rifle or pistol able to accept a detachable magazine and that has at least one from a list of characteristics ; * A semi - automatic shotgun that has at least one from a list of characteristics ; or *
A revolving cylinder shotgun .
In tandem with the assault weapons ban is a law that bans the manufacture , transport , disposal or possession of a " large capacity ammunition feeding device , " defined as : " a magazine , belt , drum , feed strip , or similar device that : 1 ) has a capacity of , or that can be readily restored or converted to accept , more than ten rounds of ammunition ; 2 ) contains more than seven rounds of ammunition ; or 3 ) is obtained after January 15 , 2013 and has a capacity of , or can be readily restored or converted to accept more than seven rounds of ammunition . "
LOCAL ASSAULT WEAPONS BANS Section::::Local assault weapons bans .
Some local governments have laws that ban or restrict the possession of assault weapons .
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA Section::::District of Columbia .
A Washington , D.C. law banning the possession of assault weapons was upheld by a federal appeals court in 2011 .
ILLINOIS Section::::Illinois .
The law that set up Illinois ' concealed carry system in 2013 also established state preemption for certain areas of gun law , including restrictions on assault weapons .
Laws passed before July 20 , 2013 are grandfathered in , and a number of local governments in the Chicago area have laws that either prohibit or regulate the possession of firearms that they define as assault weapons .
These include the city of Chicago and Cook County .
On December 7 , 2015 , the Supreme Court of the United States refused to grant a writ of certiorari to take up a challenge brought against a decision by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit which had upheld a local law banning assault weapons and large - capacity magazines in the Chicago suburb of Highland Park , Illinois .
In refusing to hear the case , the Supreme Court allowed the ruling to stand and the ban to remain in place .
INDIANA
Section::::Indiana .
In March 1989 the Northwest Indiana cities of Gary and East Chicago city councils passed ordinances prohibiting both sale and possession of assault weapons .
Gary City Councilman Vernon G. Smith ( D-4th ) sponsored the ordinance making it a crime to possess or sell assault - type weapons .
Both of these ordinances were invalidated under statewide pre - emption legislation enacted by the Indiana General Assembly and signed into law by Governor Mitch Daniels in 2011 .
MASSACHUSETTS Section::::Massachusetts .
Boston has a law prohibiting the possession or transfer of assault weapons without a license from the Boston Police Commissioner .
PUBLIC OPINION
Section::::Public opinion .
Shortly after the 2016 Orlando nightclub shooting , a CBS News poll found that a majority of Americans ( 57 % ) supported a ban on assault weapons .
Gallup noted a similarly high percentage of Americans thought that a ban would be an effective response to terrorism after the 2015 San Bernardino shooting ( 55 % ) , and in 2013 when the question was put in a referendum format ( " Would you vote for or against a law that would reinstate and strengthen the ban on assault weapons that was in place from 1994 to 2004 ? " ) ( 56 % support ) .
But it noted that " Support for stricter gun control laws often rises after high - profile shooting incidents and then often subsides again , " and that support for stricter gun controls , although still a majority view , had declined since the early 1990s .
By October 2016 , support for an assault weapons ban had fallen to a historical low of 36 % .
In 2017 68 % of American adults supported banning assault weapons , including 48 % of gun owners and 77 % of non - gun owners , and 38 % of Republicans and 66 % of Democrats , according to a Pew Research Center survey with an error attributable to sampling of + /-
2.8 % at the 95 % level of confidence .
REFERENCES