DIVERGENT TRILOGY
The Divergent trilogy is a series of young adult science fiction adventure novels by American novelist Veronica Roth set in a post - apocalyptic dystopian Chicago .
The trilogy consists of Divergent ( 2011 ) , Insurgent ( 2012 ) and Allegiant ( 2013 ) .
A related book , ( 2014 ) , presents a series of short stories told from the perspective of one of the trilogy 's characters .
And a newly added short , We Can Be Mended ( 2018 ) , serves as an epilogue five years after the events of the trilogy from the perspective of the same character as the previous add on .
The society of the trilogy defines its citizens by their social and personality - related affiliation with five different factions , which removes the threat of anyone exercising independent will and threatening the population 's safety .
Beatrice Prior , who later changes her name to Tris , an Abnegation - born and Dauntless transfer , must figure out her life as a Divergent , while concealing her true nature , and living with the danger of being killed if it is discovered by the Erudite and Dauntless leaders .
LIST OF BOOKS
DIVERGENT
INSURGENT
ALLEGIANT
FOUR :
A DIVERGENT COLLECTION
WE CAN BE MENDED : A DIVERGENT SERIES
EPILOGUE
MAIN CHARACTERS CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
The trilogy received positive reviews from critics .
Critics praised Divergent for its plot and action , while Insurgent was praised for its writing and pace .
Another critic said that , " No one can argue that Divergent is not a fun , edge - of - your - seat read .
It is easy to get submerged in , effortless to remain engaged in , and impossible not to enjoy even the slightest bit . "
Allegiant was praised for being " gripping " and for the love story , but was criticized for its ending and prose .
FILM ADAPTATIONS Section::::Film adaptations .
Summit Entertainment bought the rights to film an adaptation of the novel and recruited Neil Burger to direct , with Shailene Woodley starring as Beatrice " Tris " Prior and Theo James as Tobias " Four " Eaton .
Lionsgate and its subsidiary Summit Entertainment distributed the film .
Kate Winslet was signed as Jeanine Matthews .
Also recruited into the cast were Maggie Q as Tori , Zoe Kravitz as Christina , Ansel Elgort as Caleb , Miles Teller as Peter , Ashley Judd as Natalie Prior , Tony Goldwyn as Andrew Prior , and Jai Courtney as Eric .
Divergent was released on March 21 , 2014 .
began filming in Atlanta on May 27 , 2014 .
Insurgent was released on March 20 , 2015 .
The adaptation of Allegiant was split into two parts ; the first part , Allegiant , was released on March 18 , 2016 , while the second part , titled Ascendant , was originally planned to be released in June 2017 .
The big screen release of Ascendant was shelved due to the poor box office results of Allegiant .
As of July 2016 , Ascendant was scheduled to be released as a TV movie , which has not yet been aired as of December 2018 .
REFERENCES