ALPHA - GAL ALLERGY Alpha - gal allergy , also known as meat allergy or mammalian meat allergy ( MMA ) , is a reaction to galactose - alpha-1,3-galactose ( alpha - gal ) , whereby the body is overloaded with immunoglobulin E ( IgE ) antibodies on contact with the carbohydrate .
The alpha - gal molecule is found in all mammals apart from Old World monkeys and the apes , which include humans .
Anti - gal is a human natural antibody that interacts specifically with the mammalian carbohydrate structure gal alpha 1 - 3Gal
beta 1 - 4GlcNAc - R ,
termed , the alpha - galactosyl epitope .
Whereas alpha - gal is absent from humans , apes , and Old World monkeys , it is abundant in New World monkeys , prosimians , and nonprimate mammals .
Bites from certain ticks , such as the lone star tick in the US , which can transfer this carbohydrate to a victim , have been implicated in the development of this delayed allergic response to consumption of mammalian meat products .
Despite myths to the contrary , individuals with alpha - gal allergy do not need to become vegetarians , because poultry , fish , and in some people , lean meat such as venison do not trigger a reaction .
The allergy most often occurs in the central and southern United States , which corresponds to the distribution of the lone star tick .
In the Southern United States , where the tick is most prevalent , allergy rates are 32 % higher than elsewhere .
However , as doctors are not required to report the number of patients with alpha - gal allergy , the true number of affected individuals is unknown .
While no cure is known , symptoms of the allergy may recede over time .
A typical allergic reaction to alpha - gal has a delayed onset , occurring 3–8 hours after the consumption of mammalian meat products , in contrast to the typical rapid onset of most food allergies .
After the delayed onset , the allergic response is like most food allergies , and especially an IgE - mediated allergy , including severe whole - body itching , hives , angioedema , gastrointestinal upset , and possible anaphylaxis .
In 70 % of cases the reaction is accompanied by respiratory distress and as such is particularly harmful to those with asthma .
Alpha - gal allergies are the first known food allergies that present the possibility of delayed anaphylaxis .
It is also the first known food - related allergy associated with a carbohydrate , rather than a protein .
CAUSE Section::::Cause .
Alpha - gal allergies develop after a person has been bitten by the lone star tick in the United States , the European castor bean tick , the paralysis tick in Australia and a currently unknown tick in South Africa .
Alpha - gal is not naturally present in apes , Old World monkeys , or humans , but is in all other mammals .
If a tick feeds on another mammal , the alpha - gal remains in its alimentary tract .
The tick then injects the alpha - gal into a person 's skin , which causes the immune system to release a flood of IgE antibodies to fight the foreign carbohydrate .
Researchers still do not know which specific component of tick saliva causes the reaction .
A 2012 preliminary study found unexpectedly high rates of alpha - gal allergy in the Western and North Central parts of the United States .
This suggests that unknown tick species may spread the allergy .
The study even found alpha - gal allergy cases in Hawaii , where no ticks identified with the allergies live .
Human factors were suggested , but no specific examples were provided .
Alpha - gal is present in the anticancer drug cetuximab , as well as the intravenous fluid replacements Gelofusine and Haemaccel .
Blood thinners derived from porcine intestine and replacement heart valves derived from porcine tissue may also contain alpha - gal .
At least one instance of a man with an alpha - gal allergy going into anaphylaxis after receiving a heart valve transplant has been reported .
Some researchers have suggested that the alpha - gal in pig 's tissue that surgeons use for xenografts might contribute to organ rejection .
MECHANISM Section::::Mechanism .
The lone star tick injects alpha - gal into the blood stream , and
then the immune system releases IgE antibodies to fight this foreign sugar .
After this reaction , the future intake of mammal meat with the same alpha - gal causes an allergic reaction .
Symptoms of the allergy reaction are caused by too many IgE antibodies attacking the allergen , in this case
the alpha - gal .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
A traditional skin - prick allergy test for allergy to meat may give a false - negative answer .
Blood tests for IgE response indicating alpha - gal allergy have not been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration , and must usually be purchased by private individuals , but are available and in use .
Determination of specific IgE to alpha - gal testing is commercially available .
Skin and basophil activation tests with cetuximab are the most sensitive , but high costs limit their use .
PROGNOSIS Section::::Prognosis .
Unlike most food allergies , in some people , the alpha - gal allergy may recede over time , as long as the person is not bitten by another tick .
The recovery period can take 8 months to 5 years .
DESENSITIZATION
Section::::Desensitization .
So far , only two successful desensitizations have been performed on patients with an alpha - gal allergy HISTORY Section::::History .
The allergy was first formally identified as originating from tick bites in 2002 by Thomas Platts - Mills .
Platts - Mills and Scott Commins were attempting to discover why some people were reacting negatively to the carbohydrate in the cancer drug cetuximab .
They had previously hypothesized that a fungal infection or parasite could lead to the allergy .
When Platts - Mills was bitten by a tick and developed alpha - gal allergies , his team came to the conclusion that a link existed between tick bites and the allergy .
They found that the IgE antibody response to the mammalian oligosaccharide epitope , alpha - gal , was associated with both the immediate - onset anaphylaxis during first exposure to intravenous cetuximab and the delayed - onset anaphylaxis 3 to 6 hours after ingestion of mammalian food products , such as beef or pork .
Alpha - gal allergies are similar to pork – cat syndrome , hence misidentification can occur .
Pork –
cat syndrome usually elicits an immediate allergic response , while a true alpha - gal allergy typically features a delayed allergic reaction of 3 to 8 hours after ingestion of the allergen .
SEE ALSO
* Poultry allergy
REFERENCES FURTHER READING