THE 100 ( NOVEL SERIES )
The 100 is a series of young adult science fiction novels by Kass Morgan .
The first book in the series , The 100 , was published on September 3 , 2013 , by Little , Brown Books for Young Readers .
Day 21 , its sequel , was released on September 25 , 2014 , and Homecoming was released on February 26 , 2015 .
A fourth novel , Rebellion , was released on December 6 , 2016 .
Prior to the publication of the first book , television producer Jason Rothenberg became interested in adapting the story for the screen .
The eponymous TV series adaptation premiered on March 19 , 2014 , on The CW Network , starring Eliza Taylor and Bob Morley as Clarke Griffin and Bellamy Blake , respectively .
PLOT
THE 100 Section::::Plot .
Section::::The 100 .
The series is set three generations after a thermonuclear apocalypse , wherein the only known survivors of the human race live in a space colony consisting of satellites joined together in orbit around the Earth and governed by The Chancellor , who leads its legislative council .
Resources are so scarce that all crimes , no matter how small , are punishable by death , unless the perpetrator is under 18 years of age .
The 100 begins with Clarke Griffin , a former medical student , being arrested for a crime committed by her parents : conducting illegal experiments on children under threat of the corrupt Vice Chancellor Rhodes .
Clarke confides in her best friend Wells , The Chancellor 's son .
Despite swearing secrecy to Clarke , Wells tells his father , hoping to save the Griffins from Rhodes .
His plan backfires , the Griffins are arrested , and his relationship with Clarke disintegrates .
Two years later , the Colony decides to send 100 of its teenage prisoners to investigate whether or not Earth is habitable .
Among the 100 are Clarke , Wells , Octavia Blake , her older brother Bellamy Blake , and Clarke 's friend , Thalia .
The group crashes somewhere on the East Coast in the former United States .
Once there , the 100 struggle to survive in a world very different from the past Earth .
Clarke tends to the wounded , and Bellamy gradually develops a romantic interest in her .
It is revealed that Octavia had become a drug addict while in prison .
A few days later , someone sets fire to the camp , killing Thalia .
As the survivors investigate , they discover a farm not too far from the site , leading them to the realization that they are not alone .
THE 100 : DAY 21 Section::::The 100 : Day 21 .
Twenty - one days after they land on Earth , the 100 continue to face recurring attacks from an unknown enemy .
Octavia has been missing since the fire .
Wells tries to maintain morale , while Bellamy tries to find his sister .
The 100 find an Earthborn girl , Sasha Walgrove , and hold her hostage .
Sasha tells them that they have landed in the former state of Virginia , and that there are people from the Colony who arrived before the 100 .
Bellamy believes that Sasha 's people are responsible for Octavia 's disappearance and demands that Sasha reveal their location .
Wells and Sasha bond , and Sasha helps Wells find food for the surviving colonists .
In space , the people of the Colony fight to get into their drop ships as the space station 's life support begins to fail ; Clarke and Wells ' friends , Glass and Luke , are among the people desperately trying to get to Earth .
However , they find themselves at the mercy of Vice Chancellor Rhodes , who is willing to kill to get into one of the dropships .
Sasha leads Clarke and Bellamy to a colony beneath the ruins of Mount Weather Emergency Operations Center .
There , they meet her father , Max Walgrove , who is the leader of the colony .
Octavia is at Mount Weather , having been rescued by Max and his people from a group of renegades .
These renegades are responsible for the attacks on the 100 .
Max and his people promise that they will continue helping the 100 , and will provide further support once the rest of the Colony arrives .
At this point , they find dropships from the Colony falling from the sky .
Wells eventually realizes that there is something familiar about Bellamy and Octavia ; ultimately , he discovers that their mother was Melinda Blake , the woman his father had loved before marrying Wells ' mother for the sake of his career .
This discovery leads Wells and Bellamy to realize that they are paternal half - brothers .
THE 100 :
HOMECOMING Section::::The 100
: Homecoming .
After the dropships crash , Clarke , Bellamy , and Wells lead a rescue party to the crash site , allowing Clarke and Wells to reunite with Glass and Luke .
Clarke ponders leaving the camp to search for her parents .
The Chancellor , still in a coma , remains trapped in the Colony above Earth .
Vice Chancellor Rhodes takes control over the community on Earth , planning to force Luke to execute Bellamy , as a warning to anyone attempting to challenge him .
With Sasha 's help , Clarke and Wells escape with the wounded Bellamy .
In addition , Glass and Luke flee the camp to escape Vice Chancellor Rhodes .
One of Rhodes ' men kills Sasha when she tries to get more supplies .
Rhodes plans to attack Mount Weather to recapture Bellamy , Clarke , and Wells .
As Mount Weather prepares for Rhodes ' attack , some of the Colonists revolt and join their benefactors against Rhodes .
Clarke , Bellamy , and Wells are captured during the initial exchange , but another faction of Earthborns defeat and capture Rhodes before he can execute Bellamy .
Later , more colonists from other dropships arrive , and one of the arrivals informs Wells that his father was still in a coma , with only a few hours of oxygen left when their dropship departed .
Before Sasha 's funeral , Clarke reunites with her parents at Mount Weather .
She reconciles with Wells but will not resume their past relationship because she is romantically involved with Bellamy .
THE 100 :
REBELLION Section::::The 100 : Rebellion .
A fourth novel , Rebellion , was released on December 6 , 2016 .
A month after the previous novel , Bellamy begins showing signs of what Clarke thinks is paranoia when he obsesses over small details in the woods .
However , a group of self - proclaimed " Protectors " infiltrates their camp and abducts several of its inhabitants , including Wells , Glass and Octavia .
As Clarke and Bellamy organize a rescue team to take their new enemy down , their relationship is put to the ultimate test when Bellamy does n't think Clarke trusts him .
Eventually , the rescue team and prisoners are able to take the Protectors down as a team effort and in the aftermath , Clarke and Bellamy make up and with her parents ' blessing , he asks her to marry him .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Publisher Weekly commented that Morgan 's flair for the dramatic in The 100 " can be forced , but it 's easy to be drawn in " .
In addition , Booklist calls The 100 " dark and riveting " , blending " science fiction , romance , and characters ' shadow sides with a mostly engrossing plotline .
The 100 reached # 13 on The New York Times ' Young Adult Best Seller List .
Kirkus Reviews commented Day 21 is " faster paced than " its predecessor .
TELEVISION ADAPTATION
Section::::Television adaptation .
On May 9 , 2013 , The CW Television Network announced that the pilot was officially ordered to series for the 2013–14 American television season .
The series is developed by Jason Rothenberg , and premiered on March 19 , 2014 .
In March 2017 , The CW renewed the series for a fifth season , which premiered on April 24 , 2018 .
In May 2018 , the series was renewed for a sixth season .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official Tumblr