BORDERLANDS :
THE PRE - SEQUEL Borderlands : The Pre - Sequel is an action role - playing first - person shooter video game developed by 2 K Australia , with assistance from Gearbox Software and published by 2 K Games .
It is the third game in the Borderlands series , and is set between 2009 's Borderlands and 2012 's Borderlands 2 .
It was released for Microsoft Windows , OS X , Linux , PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 on 14 October 2014 .
PlayStation 4 and Xbox One ports were released as part of on 24 March 2015 .
The storyline of The Pre - Sequel focuses on Handsome Jack ( the antagonist in Borderlands 2 ) , an employee of the Hyperion corporation ; after the company 's Helios space station is captured by a military operation known as the Lost Legion , he leads a group of four playable characters — all of whom were non - playable characters and bosses in previous Borderlands games — on an expedition to re - gain control of Helios and defeat the Lost Legion .
The game expands upon the engine and gameplay of Borderlands 2 and introduced gameplay mechanics , including low - gravity environments , freeze weapons , and oxygen tanks , which are used to navigate and perform ground slamming attacks .
The Pre - Sequel received positive reviews ; while praised for its new gameplay features , character classes , and for maintaining the trademark humour and style of previous entries in the franchise with an additional Australian comedy flair , the game was criticized by some for having confusing level designs , and for not providing many significant deviations from the core mechanics and gameplay of Borderlands 2 to make the game more than simply a standalone " expansion pack " for it .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
Gameplay in The Pre - Sequel is similar to Borderlands 2 , but with the addition of new mechanics .
Two varieties of items have been added , including laser guns , and items possessing a cryogenic elemental effect , which can be used to slow down and freeze enemies .
Enemies that are frozen can be smashed into pieces by using melee attacks .
The game features low - gravity environments , causing players to jump higher but slower , and items such as loot and dead bodies to float away .
O2 kits are added to supply air while in space ; oxygen supplies can be replenished using generators , vents , and through oxygen tank items dropped by enemies .
The kits can be used like a jetpack to perform double jumps , hovering , and ground slamming attacks ; as with other items , different types of O2 kits can provide stat bonuses and affect how ground slams deal damage .
A new " Grinder " machine allows players to deposit combinations of existing weapons to receive one of higher rarity .
Vehicles were introduced , including a moon buggy , and the " Stingray"—a type of hoverbike .
As with Borderlands 2 , completing the main campaign with a character unlocks " True Vault Hunter Mode " , a second playthrough that is higher in difficulty , while beating the mode and reaching level 50 unlocks the third playthrough " Ultimate Vault Hunter Mode " .
PLOT CHARACTERS Section::::Plot .
Section::::Characters .
The Pre - Sequel features four playable characters , each with a different class and abilities .
All four of The Pre - Sequels protagonists were non - player characters ( NPCs ) in previous Borderlands games .
Athena , " the Gladiator " , is a rogue assassin from the Atlas Corporation introduced in the Borderlands DLC campaign The Secret Armory of General Knoxx .
As her primary skill , Athena can use a temporary shield to absorb damage ; this ability can be upgraded to make the shield itself into a weapon that can be thrown at enemies , and allow it to absorb elemental damage which can in turn , be reflected back at enemies .
Nisha , " the Lawbringer " , first appeared in Borderlands 2 as the unnamed sheriff of the town of Lynchwood .
Her primary skill , " Showdown " , increases gun damage and speed , and allows the player to quickly switch between enemies in the area .
Her skill tree " Law & Order " contains skills oriented towards collecting buffs known as " Order " , which can heal , recharge health and shields , or temporarily increase other stats depending on the number of Order stacks collected .
The " Fan the Hammer " skill tree is oriented towards dealing additional damage using guns along with the ability to dual - wield , while " The Riflewoman " incorporates skills that provide buffs for point shooting and reload speed .
Claptrap , " the Fragtrap " , is the last remaining robot of its kind as of Borderlands 2 ; his skill " VaultHunter.exe " generates random effects depending on the current situation .
These effects can have a positive or negative impact on the player and their other party members ; among these effects are versions of skills used by the previous playable characters in the franchise .
The mercenary Wilhelm , " the Enforcer " , becomes increasingly augmented with technology and weaponry over the course of the game , transforming him into the more familiar cybernetic form he possessed as the second major boss in Borderlands 2 .
He can summon a pair of drones , Wolf and Saint ; Wolf serves an offensive role by attacking other enemies , while Saint defends Wilhelm by providing shields and health regeneration .
Two additional characters have been released as downloadable content .
The first character , Jack , " the Doppelganger " , is a man named Timothy Lawrence working as a body double of Handsome Jack who can summon digital copies of Jack to fight alongside him .
The second , Aurelia , " the Baroness " , is the sister of Sir Hammerlock who uses an experimental " Frost Diadem Shard " to deal ice elemental damage to enemies .
Both characters become disillusioned with Jack 's moral decline over the course of the game .
STORY Section::::Story .
The opening of The Pre - Sequel begins some time after Borderlands 2 and Episode 3 of Tales from the Borderlands , on the flying city of Sanctuary , where the three former Vault Hunters Lilith , Brick , and Mordecai interrogate Athena after having captured her from the Atlas Domes .
Athena recounts her story , starting after the death of General Knoxx , when she received an offer to go find a Vault on Pandora 's moon , Elpis , from a Hyperion programmer named Jack .
She joins fellow Vault Hunters Nisha , Wilhelm , and Claptrap , on a spaceship headed for the Hyperion moon base Helios .
On the way , they are ambushed by the Lost Legion , an army of Dahl soldiers led by Colonel Tungsteena Zarpedon , and crash - land onto the moon base .
After meeting up with Jack , they attempt to use Helios 's defense system , but realizes there is a jamming signal coming from Elpis .
They attempt to escape , but they are stopped by Zarpedon , and a mysterious alien - like warrior .
Jack sends the Vault Hunters to Elpis on a moonshot rocket .
After landing on Elpis , the Vault Hunters are helped by Janey Springs , a junk dealer , who guides them to the spaceport known as Concordia .
Here , the Hunters , under Jack 's orders , request help from Moxxi to find the jamming signal .
After raiding a former Dahl station , they find out that the signal was put up by the Meriff , the person in charge of Concordia , as well as Jack 's former underling .
While this is happening , Zarpedon activates Helios ' primary weapon , the Eye of Helios , which fires powerful lasers on the surface of Elpis .
The Meriff is later killed by Jack at his office due to a failed attempt to kill Jack from behind .
With Concordia secured , Jack and Moxxi guide the Vault Hunters to the next step in retaking Helios .
They proceed to infiltrate a Lost Legion base , run by two Dahl officers , The Bosun and The Skipper , in search of an artificial intelligence , which Jack plans to use to build a robot army .
After defeating Bosun , it is revealed that the Skipper , who renames herself Felicity , is the A.I. they were looking for .
The Vault Hunters travel to a robot production facility , where Jack enlists the help of a scientist named Gladstone to build his robot army .
Gladstone suggests using his prototype robot , named the Constructor , which has the ability to construct an infinite number of robots .
At first , Felicity agrees to help them by becoming the A.I. for the Constructor , but upon witnessing the violence she has to go through , she begins to hesitate .
After being forced into the Constructor bot , she takes control of it and battles the Vault Hunters .
Felicity is defeated , and her personality is deleted from the Constructor bot .
Having achieved his robot army , Jack and the Vault Hunters travel to Helios , while enlisting the help of Moxxi and two former Vault Hunters , Roland and Lilith ( who were on Elpis for a vacation ) .
They defeat Zarpedon and the Lost Legion , and proceed to reboot the Eye of Helios .
It is revealed that the Eye is actually the eye of the Destroyer , the beast that was released from Pandora 's Vault in the first game .
The Vault Hunters begin to inject slag into the Eye , under Moxxi 's directions .
When attempting to reboot , Moxxi reveals her true motives for helping Jack : to destroy the Eye and prevent Jack from gaining ultimate power .
Jack and the Vault Hunters travel back to Elpis , where they find its Vault having already been opened , as mentioned by Zarpedon during her last moment .
The Hunters battle several of the Vault 's guardians , and defeat its ultimate weapon , the Deva - like Empyrean Sentinel .
With the Sentinel defeated , Jack enters the Vault and greets the Vault Hunters , but finds no item of value , other than a mysterious symbol floating in midair .
As he attempts to interact with it , the symbol shows Jack a vision of the Warrior awakening .
However , the vision is interrupted by Lilith , who phasewalks in front of him and punches through the Vault symbol , burning it onto Jack 's face .
She disappears , leaving Jack behind with the Vault Hunters .
Jack , having gone insane from the vision as well as Lilith 's attack , swears vengeance on her , and all the " bandits " on Pandora .
Realizing that the hero who once saved her on Helios is no more , Athena leaves Jack 's employ .
Having finished listening to Athena 's story , Lilith orders the Crimson Raiders to execute her , against Brick and Mordecai 's protests .
However , as they open fire on her , Athena is saved by the alien warrior who appeared on Helios with Zarpedon that day , which reveals itself to be one of the legendary Eridians .
The Eridian warns the Vault Hunters of an imminent war , and that they would need " all the Vault Hunters they can get " .
During the credits , several scenes showing what became of the Vault Hunters after helping Jack play .
Wilhelm is transformed further into a machine , Athena discards the money given to her by Jack , Nisha and Jack establish their reign on Pandora , and Claptrap is dismantled and left for dead by Jack at Windshear Waste .
In a post - credit scene , Jack is seen strangling his CEO , Tassiter , in his office , and announces to a woman on an intercom that he has replaced Tassiter as the new head of Hyperion , and tells her to call him by his new name , Handsome Jack .
CLAPTASTIC VOYAGE
Section::::Claptastic Voyage .
The Claptastic Voyage story add - on continues shortly after Jack 's takeover of Hyperion , as he discovers a secret program called the H - Source , containing all secrets of Hyperion .
However , it is hidden inside the Claptrap unit by his deceased boss , Tassiter .
Jack employs his Vault Hunters once more to be digitally scanned and sent into Claptrap 's mind in order to retrieve the H - Source .
In the process , the Vault Hunters are tricked into releasing 5H4D0W - TP , a subroutine representing Claptrap 's inner evil , who attempts to use the H - Source for his own gains .
As the group pursues 5H4D0W - TP , they delve deeper into Claptrap 's mind , learning of his origins and the reasons for his quirky behaviors .
Eventually , the group confront 5H4D0W - TP and defeat him , and retrieve the H - Source for Jack .
Jack reveals his plan to use the H - Source to wipe out all existing CL4P - TP units , including Claptrap himself .
All CL4P - TP units are later dumped in Windshear Waste ; however , 5H4D0W - TP , who still remains alive within Claptrap , sacrifices himself to revive Claptrap , allowing him to be found later by Sir Hammerlock .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Borderlands 2 , developed by Gearbox Software and released in late 2012 , was one of the most successful video games in 2 K 's history .
Speaking in February 2013 , Gearbox CEO Randy Pitchford stated that there were no plans for a third installment in the franchise , as the company believed that a sequel to Borderlands 2 would have to be " massive " , but that " when you think of what Borderlands 3 should be ... No , we do n't know what that is yet .
We can imagine what it must achieve , but we do n't know what it is yet " .
The company also cited a desire to focus its attention onto new games for next - generation consoles , such as Brothers in Arms :
Furious Four , Homeworld : Shipbreakers ( a new game in the Homeworld franchise , which Gearbox had recently acquired in THQ 's bankruptcy auction ) , and new properties such as Battleborn .
Despite this , the company still believed that they had not yet met the demands of fans , or even its own staff , in regards to the franchise ( even with the overall success of Borderlands 2 and the large amount of downloadable content that had been released ) , prompting the creation of spin - offs such as Tales from the Borderlands , an episodic adventure game being developed by Telltale Games , and a port of Borderlands 2 for PlayStation Vita .
A few months after the release of Borderlands 2 ( and shortly after it had concluded its contributions to BioShock Infinite ) , Gearbox began working with 2 K Australia to develop a prequel to the game which would take place directly after the events of the original .
The decision to make the game a prequel to Borderlands 2 was centered around a desire to use the Hyperion moonbase ( a location alluded to , and visible in Borderlands 2 ) as a playable location ; the development team felt that going to the moonbase in a sequel to Borderlands 2 would be too " boring " for players since the relevant conflict was already resolved , and because " if we 're going to go to the moonbase anyway , what if we try something completely different that people are n't expecting [ ? ] " .
Pitchford noted that this setting would allow the game to address plot elements and events alluded to in the first two games that were not yet completely addressed — on the possibility that the game could introduce holes in the continuity of the franchise , he joked that the franchise already contained many plot holes to begin with .
He suggested that working on The Pre - Sequel could be a breakout role for 2 K Australia , similar to Gearbox 's own .
As for the size of the game , Pitchford stated that The Pre - Sequels playable world would be in between the size of the original and Borderlands 2 .
2
K Australia performed the majority of development on The Pre - Sequel , but worked in collaboration with Gearbox on certain aspects of the game .
The studio also provided its writing staff — including Anthony Burch , lead writer of Borderlands 2—as a complement to 2 K Australia 's own writers .
The engine of Borderlands 2 was used as a starting point , allowing the 2 K Australia team to quickly prototype and implement features on top of the existing functionality already provided by Borderlands 2 .
Most of the new mechanics in the game , such as ice weaponry , were conceived by the 2 K Australia team ; Gearbox 's developers had shown concerns that freezing weapons were illogical in comparison to the other elemental weapon types , such as incendiary and acid , but Pitchford excused their inclusion in The Pre - Sequel because cryogenic technology was more " natural " in the space - oriented setting of the game .
The four playable characters have an increased amount of dialogue in comparison to their equivalents in previous instalments ; NPC dialogue can change depending on the characters present .
Developers also felt that The Pre - Sequel would have more diverse humour than previous installments due to the makeup of its writing staff , and a decision to portray the Moon 's inhabitants as being Australians themselves , allowing for references to Australian comedy and culture , including missions referencing cricket , the folk song " Waltzing Matilda " , and a talking shotgun based upon the bogan stereotype .
Bruce Spence , a New Zealand actor known for his role as the Gyro Captain in Mad Max 2 ( the second film in the Mad Max franchise that was cited as an influence on the setting of Borderlands as a whole ) , is among the game 's voice actors – voicing a gyrocopter pilot in reference to his role from the film .
The Pre - Sequel would be the final video game developed by 2 K Australia , as the studio was shut down on 16 April 2015 .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Borderlands : The Pre - Sequel was released in North America on 14 October 2014 .
Initially , the game was not released on eighth - generation consoles such as PlayStation 4 or Xbox One .
As porting The Pre - Sequel to next - generation consoles would require rebuilding the engine ( and thus defeating the purpose of retaining the engine used by Borderlands 2 ) , developers instead targeted the game to the same console platforms that previous installments in the Borderlands franchise were released for .
In July 2014 , 2 K Australia 's head Tony Lawrence stated that there was a possibility that The Pre - Sequel could be ported to next - generation consoles , gauged by fan demand and sales .
In August 2014 , financial statements by Take - Two Interactive disclosed that a Linux port of the game was also in development ; these details were confirmed by 2 K in a statement to gaming news site IGN.com .
The port , which was accompanied by a port of Borderlands 2 released in late - September 2014 , was released for Linux through Steam .
As part of pre - release promotional efforts for the game , Gearbox began releasing Pre - Sequel - inspired character skins for Borderlands 2 in July 2014 , and at San Diego Comic - Con , Gearbox partnered with The Nerdist to set up a Borderlands - themed laser tag field at Petco Park during the convention .
On 18 September 2014 , an extended 10-minute trailer featuring Sir Hammerlock and Mr. Torgue was released .
On 30 September 2014 , Pitchford confirmed that the game had gone gold .
On 20 January 2015 , 2 K announced that it would release a compilation of Borderlands 2 and The Pre - Sequel , , for PS4 and Xbox One on 24 March 2015 .
It includes both games and all of their respective DLC .
DOWNLOADABLE CONTENT Section::::Downloadable content .
As with Borderlands 2 , downloadable content ( DLC ) , including new characters and story campaigns , will be made for The Pre - Sequel , which can be purchased separately or together as a " Season Pass " .
The Shock Drop Slaughter Pit was released at launch as a pre - order exclusive .
The first DLC character , released on 11 November 2014 , is a body double of Handsome Jack , " the Doppelganger " ; he can summon clones of himself known as " digi - Jacks " to fight alongside him .
Jack 's skill trees mainly focus on granting bonuses to himself , as well as his Digi - Jacks .
The first DLC campaign , The Holodome Onslaught , was released on 14 December 2014 ; it includes missions in the titular challenge arena , which features Athena re - telling a shortened version of the game 's story to Borderlands 2s Axton and Gaige , the third playthrough , " Ultimate Vault Hunter Mode " , raising the character level cap to 60 , along with an additional mission that ties into Handsome Jack 's presence in Tales from the Borderlands .
The second DLC character , Lady Aurelia Hammerlock , " the Baroness " , was released on 27 January 2015 ; she is the elder sister of supporting character Sir Hammerlock .
Her action skill is a homing ice shard which can cycle between enemies as they are killed by it : her skill trees provide enhancements to the shard , can increase cryo damage , and the ability to assign a teammate as her " servant"—allowing both players to benefit from bonuses granted by each other 's kills .
The second DLC campaign , Claptastic Voyage and Ultimate Vault Hunter Upgrade Pack 2 , was released on 24 March 2015 , coinciding with the release of The Handsome Collection .
The DLC 's title is a reference to the film Fantastic Voyage , which has a similar plotline involving miniaturisation and travel through a body .
It features the player characters being sent into the mind of Claptrap by Handsome Jack to retrieve a mysterious piece of software known as the " H - Source " , hidden within it by Hyperion 's former CEO Harold Tassiter , resulting in the release of Shadowtrap , the digital manifestation of Claptrap 's FR4G - TP program .
The story also features the CL4P - TP genocide and a deeper look into Claptrap 's depression .
2
K Australia 's creative director Jonathan Pelling cited Fantastic Voyage , Tron , and the holodeck of Star Trek as influences on the campaign , explaining that " We thought the best way to get to know Claptrap a little bit more was to actually go inside his mind and see what he thinks .
To get those perspectives , recover those memories , and dig through his dirty laundry .
" The DLC also raises the character level cap to 70 , and feature a customizable challenge arena .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Borderlands :
The Pre - Sequel received positive reviews from critics .
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the PlayStation 3 version 77/100 based on 24 reviews , the Microsoft Windows version 75/100 based on 55 reviews and the Xbox 360 version 74/100 based on 16 reviews .
Daniel Bloodworth from GameTrailers gave the game an 8.4/10 .
He praised the characters and the new gameplay mechanics introduced in The Pre - Sequel .
He ended the review by saying that " new playable characters are worth exploring and the tweaks to the formula have an impact across the entire breadth of the game . "
David Roberts from GamesRadar gave the game an 8/10 , praising its diverse character classes , hilarious writing and the core combat which he stated , " has maintained the series ' weird , satisfying mix of anarchic , tactical gunplay and compulsive RPG overtones . " .
However , he criticized the weak story , as well as non - drastic changes when compared with Borderlands 2 .
He described the general experience as " a hilarious , fan - focused continuation of the series ' core values , but lacking any true evolution , which made it a fun diversion rather than a meaningful new chapter . "
Vince Ingenito from IGN gave the game an 8/10 .
He praised the gearing options and the low - gravity mechanics , which made the game " a fresh experience " .
He also praised the entertaining Jack - focused story , but criticized its poor pacing .
Jessica Conditt from Joystiq gave the game a 7/10 , praising its new gameplay mechanics , well - defined classes , as well as the interesting and comedic bosses encountered and unique environments , but criticizing the confusing level design , frustrating death and predictable missions which lack variety .
Evan Lahti from PCGamer gave the game a 77/100 , praising its new gameplay features , which he stated had brought novelty and a gracefulness to Borderlands ' combat , but criticizing the mission design , which seldom made use of the gameplay mechanics introduced in Pre - Sequel .
He stated that " The Pre - Sequel feels like a super - sized Borderlands 2 DLC .
While the new setting , classes , and weapon types reinvigorate the experience , The Pre - Sequel does n't deviate much from the feel and format of Borderlands 2 . "
Darren Nakamura from Destructoid gave the game a 6/10 , praising its fast yet tactical combat , but criticizing the disappointing ending , number of bugs , as well as boring and uninteresting environmental art direction , but he still summarized the game as a " solid entry to the series . "
Jim Sterling from The Escapist gave the game an 8/10 .
He praised the combination of weapons with the use of the Grinder , a new machine introduced in The Pre - Sequel , as well as the new vehicles available , but criticized the map design , frustrating encounter with enemies , as well as being too similar to the previous installments .
Adam Beck from Hardcore Gamer gave the game a 2.5/5 , criticizing its bugs , loot system , script , campaign , world design and performance of characters .
He summarized the game as " an unpolished , uninspired adventure where fun can be had with friends , but that time could be better spent elsewhere . "
IGN gave the Claptastic Voyage campaign an 8.4 out of 10 , praising it for its " whimsical " setting , new mechanics , making better use of the anti - gravity mechanics that were introduced by The Pre - Sequel , and for not containing the " excessive backtracking and pacing problems " faced by the game 's main storyline .
Ingenito concluded that it " [ still ] does n't quite match the towering success of Tiny Tina 's Assault on Dragon Keep for Borderlands 2 , but it still handily sets a high watermark for The Pre - Sequel .
It 's lean and focused in a way the main game it belongs to sometimes was n't , and yet it still feels substantial and complete . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS