THE LAST OF US REMASTERED
The Last of Us Remastered is an action - adventure survival horror video game developed by Naughty Dog and published by Sony Computer Entertainment .
An enhanced port of 2013 's The Last of Us
, Remastered was released for PlayStation 4 worldwide in July 2014 .
Among minor gameplay additions , the game features enhanced graphics and rendering upgrades including increased draw distance , an upgraded combat mechanic and higher frame rate .
It also includes the downloadable content episode .
The game is set twenty years after an outbreak of the mutated strain of Cordyceps fungus that destroyed much of civilization .
The single - player story follows Joel , tasked with escorting the young Ellie across a post - apocalyptic United States , in an attempt to create a potential cure against the infection to which Ellie is immune .
Players make their way through various locations , fighting against the Infected and hostile human survivors .
The multiplayer lets up to eight players engage in cooperative or competitive game matches .
To accommodate Remastereds technical enhancements , Naughty Dog spent months developing the game , beginning upon the release of The Last of Us .
The game received critical acclaim .
Reviewers were impressed with the graphics upgrades , praising all of the enhancements and additions .
It also became a commercial success , selling over one million units within its first month .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
The Last of Us Remastered changes little from the basic gameplay of the original version .
As such , it is an action - adventure survival horror game that uses a third - person perspective .
The game involves gunfights , melee combat and a cover system .
For most of the game , players control Joel ; Ellie and other companions are controlled by the artificial intelligence .
Remastered uses the DualShock 4 's touchpad to navigate inventory items , and the light bar signals health , scaling from blue to orange and red when taking damage .
In addition , audio recordings found in the game world can be heard through the controller 's speaker ; the original version forced players to remain in a menu while the recordings were played .
The game 's Photo Mode allows players to capture images of the game by pausing gameplay and adjusting the camera freely .
In the menu , players have the ability to watch all cutscenes with audio commentary featuring creative director Neil Druckmann , Troy Baker and Ashley Johnson , who portrayed Joel and Ellie , respectively .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
In March 2014 , information concerning a release of The Last of Us on PlayStation 4 was leaked .
This was followed by the appearance of the game , titled The Last of Us Remastered on the PlayStation Store on April 9 , 2014 ; Naughty Dog announced the game on the same day .
This enhanced version of the game features an increased draw distance , character models of higher resolution , improved lighting and shadows , and an upgraded combat mechanic .
It runs a native 1080p resolution at 60 frames per second , with the option to lock the game at 30 frames per second .
At E3 2014 , Sony announced that the game would be released on July 29 , 2014 .
Some of the downloadable content from The Last of Us is bundled with Remastered , including and some multiplayer maps , while others require a separate purchase .
In Remastered , character textures were increased by a factor of four , shadows were doubled and a new lighting process was implemented .
The motion blur when turning the camera , used to hide slower loading textures , was reduced , and the game 's environments look " crisper " .
In addition , new settings were introduced to allow players to customize the game 's audio channels , and the loading times were reduced , due to the game streaming from the hard drive as opposed to the disc .
One of the biggest developmental challenges was fitting all content onto one Blu - ray Disc .
The changing of the in - game textures , and the inclusion of Left Behind , were the cause for this difficulty .
According to lead developer Christian Gyrling , Remastered " looked broken up until a week before shipping " .
Development on Remastered began shortly following the release of The Last of Us in June 2013 .
Though initially under light development , the team began working harder on Remastered when they saw the demand for it ; work on the game 's code did not begin until a larger team was introduced to Remastered in February 2014 .
As development on the original game ended , the programmers expected that the game would be ported to the PlayStation 4 , but planning and preparation did not begin until The Last of Us had launched .
The team aimed at creating a " true " remaster , maintaining the " same core experience " and not changing any large story or gameplay elements .
For the game 's frame rate , the team was initially split , with some preferring 30 frames per second rather than 60 ; when the game was running at the latter , the whole team became convinced .
The team that worked on Remastered was significantly smaller than the team for The Last of Us ; in particular , the team did not include any designers , which led to various design issues remaining from the original game .
Druckmann attributed this to the fact that Remastered was developed as a recreation of the original , altering only technical and graphical aspects .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Like the original version , The Last of Us Remastered was met with critical acclaim .
Metacritic calculated an average score of 95 out of 100 , indicating " universal acclaim " , based on 69 critics .
It is the second - highest rated PlayStation 4 game on Metacritic , behind Grand Theft Auto V.
The game 's enhanced graphics received positive reactions .
Colin Moriarty of IGN felt that the graphical fidelity of Remastered was an improvement over The Last of Us , despite the latter being " the most beautiful game [ he 'd ] seen on any console " .
GamesRadar 's David Houghton echoed this statement , calling the visuals " jaw - dropping " .
VideoGamer.com reiterated the graphical improvement over the original game , particularly praising the increased draw distance and improved lighting technology .
Liam Martin of Digital Spy also felt that the lighting system improves the gameplay and makes the game " feel even more dangerous " .
Game Informers Tim Turi stated that the game is " even more breathtaking " than The Last of Us .
Matt Swider of TechRadar appreciated the minor detail changes and the technical improvements .
The Independents Jack Fleming felt that the original game 's visual flaws were enhanced in Remastered , but greatly complimented the updated graphics regardless .
Many reviewers considered the technical enhancements , such as the increased frame rate , a welcome advancement from the original game .
Turi of Game Informer felt that the frame rate " dramatically elevate[s ] " the game above the original .
Jim Sterling of The Escapist complimented the upgraded frame rate , commenting that the original frame rate is a " noticeably inferior experience " .
IGN 's Moriarty stated that , though the change was initially " jarring " , he appreciated it through further gameplay .
Tom Hoggins of The Daily Telegraph echoed these statements , feeling as though the increased frame rate heightened the intensity of the gameplay .
Metros David Jenkins felt that the increased frame rate is almost imperceptible , though stating that it is " definitely an improvement " .
Philip Kollar of Polygon appreciated the game 's improved textures and loading times .
The addition of Photo Mode was well received .
TechRadar 's Swider named the mode as a standout feature , while IGN 's Moriarty complimented the availability to capture " gorgeous " images using the feature .
The adjustment of the controls received praise , with Moriarty of IGN particularly approving the DualShock 4 's triggers .
Swider of TechRadar felt that the additional controls result in a better functioning game , while Digital Spy 's Martin felt that it improves the game 's combat , commenting that it " increase[s ] this sense of immersion " .
Reviewers also appreciated the inclusion of the DLC and the audio commentary .
These features led The Escapists Sterling to dub Remastered as " the definitive version of the game " .
By August 2014 , The Last of Us Remastered had sold one - million copies .
It is one of the best - selling PlayStation 4 games .
The game was nominated for Best Remaster at The Game Awards 2014 , and received an honorable mention for Best Technology at the 15th Annual Game Developers Choice Awards .
REFERENCES Section::::References .
Notes Footnotes EXTERNAL LINKS