LAST CAB TO DARWIN Last Cab to Darwin is a 2003 Australian drama / comedy stage play written by Reg Cribb and based upon the true story of taxi driver Max Bell who was diagnosed with terminal stomach cancer in the early 1990s .
The 2003 production was presented both at the Sydney Opera House and the Octagon Theatre in Perth .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Taking advantage of the controversial Northern Territory 's Voluntary euthanasia law Rex decides to end his own life with dignity .
His request under the law is in bitter dispute but Rex sells up everything he owned , says goodbye to his neighbor and good friend Polly , and drives the great distance from Broken Hill , New South Wales to Darwin , Northern Territory where taking his own life would be legal .
CAST Section::::Cast .
The cast of the 2003 production was : * Barry Otto - Rex * Jacki Weaver - Dot , Backpacker 2 , Mrs Gratton , Diedre
* Justine Saunders - Polly , Mrs Chester - Burnham * Steve Rodgers - Doctor , Simmo , Publican ( off ) , Bob , Jack , Canadian Backpacker , Curly
* Michael Tuahine - Tilly , Reporter 2 - The Telegraph , Beano , Shadow , Mr Speaker , Reporter 2 ( scene 15 ) , Afghan , Sledger * Darren Gilshenan - Reporter 4 - Broken Hill Times , Doug , Barman , Mr Stanton , Reporter 3 ( scene 15 ) , Truckie , Afghan , Soldier * Alan Dukes - Reporter 1 - The Herald , Ces , Ted , Canadian Backpacker , Mr Pembroke , Reporter 4 ( scene 15 )
Afghan , Stan * Kirsty Hillhouse - Reporter 3 -
The Australian , Mrs Brown , GP , Fran , Backpacker 1 , Mrs Stilton , Reporter 1 ( scene 15 ) , Afghan , Shirl CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Variety wrote that the story of Rex Bell 's journey was " a great premise for drama " .
Bryce Hallett of Sydney Morning Herald wrote that the play was " a big - hearted , sprawling , dry - humoured , unwieldy saga which splendidly evokes the landscape of knotted trees , furnace sunsets and the dual feeling of liberation and terror on the journey from Broken Hill to Darwin . "
Adelaide Review wrote " It is not surprising that playwright Reg Cribb saw the story of Max Bell as ready - made for the telling .
It has all the elements of a mythic quest with a sturdy , self - deprecating hero meeting a host of different characters as he travels a last time through his native land . "
In their announcement of casting in 2012 for a production of the play , director Steve Wiegerink of Off the Leash Theatre stated " Both humorous and tragic , Last Cab to Darwin proves once again why Reg Cribb is one of Australia 's best playwrights . "
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS * 2002 , Winner of Patrick White Playwrights Award * 2003 , winner of Queensland Premier 's Literary Award Best Drama Play
* 2003 , winner of Western Australian Premier 's Award for best script * 2003 , nominated for Louis Esson Prize for Drama
* 2005 , winner of Drovers Australian Performing Arts Centres Association Excellence in Touring for ' Excellent Audience Response ' * 2005 , winner of Drovers Australian Performing Arts Centres Association Excellence in Touring for ' Touring Excellence ' FILM ADAPTATION Section::::Film adaptation .
Last Cab to Darwin is also the title of an Australian comedy - drama biopic directed and produced by Jeremy Sims and based on the 2003 play of the same name by Reg Cribb .
Actors Michael Caton and Jacki Weaver have starring roles in the film .
Central to the plot is the controversial theme of voluntary euthanasia .
The script for the film was adapted as a screenplay by Sims and Cribb .
Sims ' association with Reg Cribb began when his production company , Pork Chop Productions produced the successful stage version of Last Cab .
In 2006 , Sims directed Last Train to Freo , an adaptation of Cribb 's The Return .
The film was given the green - light by Screen Australia in October 2013 as one of six films to share in $ 5.4 million government funding .
In 2012 , it was confirmed that Michael Caton has been cast for the lead role and Jacki Weaver , who played several parts in the stage production , will also have a major role .
Ningali Lawford will play Polly , Rex 's neighbour .
By February 2014 , actress Emma Hamilton had joined the cast .
Hamilton plays an English nurse , presently backpacker .
It was earlier reported that the producers had been in discussions with Rebel Wilson for this role .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Last Cab to Darwin movie site