SCOTT YANCEY Scott E. Yancey ( born July 9 , 1969 ) is a TV personality , businessman , real estate investor , and author .
He is best known for his role on the A&E television series , Flipping Vegas , a modern reality TV show in which Scott and his wife , Amie Yancey purchase and repair dilapidated homes in the Las Vegas Valley , and attempt to flip them for profit .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Yancey was born on July 9 , 1969 in Los Angeles County , California , and raised in Studio City , California , where he attended North Hollywood High School .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Yancey married his future Flipping Vegas costar , Amie , on January 26 , 2000 .
Yancey has attention deficit hyperactivity disorder .
As of 2014 , the couple had a pet dog , a dachshund named Tallulah .
The couple also owns two Rhodesian ridgeback dogs named Flip and Zuma , two friesian horses named Henke and Tieme , two mini pigs named Bacon Bits and Lucy , and a mini donkey named JackAss .
CAREER REAL ESTATE Section::::Career .
Section::::Real estate .
Yancey made his first real estate deal at the age of 14 , when he received an insurance settlement of $ 30,000 , which he used to purchase the 2nd deed of trust for a home mortgage as an investment with a 14 % interest rate .
While enrolled in college , Yancey was hired to be a runner by Walter J. Plumb III , a Real Estate Attorney and investor .
Yancey continued to work with Plumb assisting in multiple real estate transactions such as the purchase of a 40-unit apartment complex and converting it to condos along with assembling dozens of land deals subdividing them into over 3000 lots .
Now working independently of Plumb , Yancey began developing retail department stores in Las Vegas , Provo , Utah , and Tempe , Arizona .
After selling his department stores and choosing to return to his real estate roots , Yancey relocated to Las Vegas in 1994 .
In 2008 , Yancey founded the Las Vegas - based Goliath Company , a real estate brokerage and investment firm .
Goliath Company focuses on investment properties , the buy & hold approach and finding land to entitle and subsidize by selling to large private companies ; which they have managed to do for a few thousand lots .
FLIPPING VEGAS
Section::::Flipping Vegas .
In 2010 , Yancey and Lovable Scoundrels Productions created the television series Flipping Vegas .
A&E originally premiered the series on June 18 , 2011 .
In addition to starring in the show , Yancey also served as an executive producer .
The show concluded its fifth season on September 27 , 2014 .
YANCEY EVENTS Section::::Yancey Events .
The Yanceys created Yancey Events as a way to help others learn about investing in real estate .
Using their stardom from Flipping Vegas , coupled with the knowledge and experience they have gained from years in the business , salespeople working for the company travel across the United States and sell educational seminars on how to properly invest in real estate .
Many participants of the events have criticized them as being a scam .
CHARITY Section::::Charity .
In one episode of Flipping Vegas , the Yanceys donated a home to a wounded veteran .
PUBLICATIONS Section::::Publications .
Yancey has published two books :
* Go Time ( 2012 ) , a 250-page book inspired by people who taught Yancey about real estate .
* Flipping Your Way to Real Estate Profits ( 2015 ) , a 221-page book offering advice to financially challenged investors on how to make profits beyond flipping houses .
REFERENCES