CALCIUM CHANNEL BLOCKER
TOXICITY Calcium channel blocker toxicity is the taking of too much of the medications known as calcium channel blockers ( CCBs ) either by accident or on purpose .
This often causes a slow heart rate and low blood pressure .
This can progress to the heart stopping altogether .
Some CCBs can also cause a fast heart rate as a result of the low blood pressure .
Other symptoms may include nausea , vomiting , sleepiness , and shortness of breath .
Symptoms usually occur in the first six hours but with some forms of the medication may not start until 24 after hours .
There are a number of treatments that may be useful .
These include efforts to reduce absorption of the drug including : activated charcoal taken by mouth if given shortly after the ingestion or whole bowel irrigation if an extended release formula was taken .
Efforts to cause vomiting are not recommended .
Medications to treat the toxic effects include : intravenous fluids , calcium gluconate , glucagon , high dose insulin , vasopressors and lipid emulsion .
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation may also be an option .
More than ten thousand cases of calcium channel blocker toxicity were reported in the United States in 2010 .
Along with beta blockers and digoxin calcium channel blockers have one of the highest rates of death in overdose .
These medications first became available in the 1970s and 1980s .
They are one of the few types of medication in which one pill can result in the death of a child .
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS Section::::Signs and symptoms .
Most people who have taken too much of a calcium channel blocker , especially diltiazem , get slow heart rate and low blood pressure .
This can progress to the heart stopping altogether .
CCBs of the dihydropyridine group , as well as flunarizine , predominantly cause reflex tachycardia as a reaction to the low blood pressure .
For verapamil , despite it having a similar mechanism of action as diltiazem , both fast and slow heart rhythm are described .
Other potential symptoms include : nausea and vomiting , a decreased level of consciousness , and breathing difficulties .
Symptoms usually begin within 6 hours of taking the medication by mouth .
With extended release formulations symptoms may not occur for up to a day .
Seizures are rare in adults but in children occur more often .
CAUSE Section::::Cause .
Calcium channel blockers , also known as calcium channel antagonists , are widely used for a number of health conditions .
Thus they are commonly present in many people 's homes .
In young children one pill may cause serious health problems and potentially death .
The calcium channel blocker that caused the greatest number of deaths in 2010 in the United States was verapamil .
This agent is believed to cause more heart problems than many of the others .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
A blood or urine test to diagnose overdose is not generally available .
CCB overdose may cause high blood sugar levels , and this is often a sign of how severe the problem will become .
ELECTROCARDIOGRAM Section::::Electrocardiogram .
CCB toxicity can cause a number of electrocardiogram abnormalities with a low sinus rhythm being the most common .
Others include : QT prolongation , bundle branch block , first - degree atrioventricular block , and even sinus tachycardia .
DIFFERENTIAL Section::::Differential .
It may not be possible to tell the difference between beta blocker toxicity and calcium channel blocker overdose based on signs and symptoms .
MANAGEMENT
Section::::Management .
The medical management of CCB toxicity may be difficult .
It may not improve with the usual treatments used for a low blood pressure and a slow heart rate .
In those who have no symptoms or signs six hours following taking an immediate release formulation and 24 hours after taking an extended release formulation need no further medical treatment .
DETOXIFICATION Section::::Detoxification .
Activated charcoal is recommended if it can be given within an hour or two of taking the calcium channel blockers .
In those who have taken an extended release formulation of a CCB but are otherwise doing fine , whole bowel irrigation with polyethylene glycol may be useful .
Causing vomiting by the use of medications such as ipecac is not recommended .
INSULIN Section::::Insulin .
High doses of intravenous insulin with glucose may be useful and are a first line treatment in overdoses .
As this treatment may cause a drop in blood sugar and blood potassium levels , these should be monitored closely .
OTHER Section::::Other .
Intravenous calcium gluconate is considered a specific antidote .
Slow heart rate can be treated with atropine and sympathomimetics .
Low blood pressure is treated with vasopressors such as adrenaline .
There is tentative clinical evidence and good theoretical evidence of the benefit of lipid emulsion in severe overdoses of CCBs .
Methylene blue may also be used for those with low blood pressure that does not respond to other treatments .
EPIDEMIOLOGY Section::::Epidemiology .
More than 10,000 cases of potential calcium channel blocker toxicity occurred in the United States in 2010 .
When death occurs in medicine overdose , heart medications are the cause more than 10 % of time .
The three most common types of heart medications that result in this outcome are calcium channel blockers along with beta blockers and digoxin .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS