HALO :
THE MASTER CHIEF COLLECTION
Halo : The Master Chief Collection is a compilation of first - person shooter video games in the Halo series for the Xbox One .
Released on November 11 , 2014 , the collection was developed by 343 Industries in partnership with other studios and was published by Microsoft Studios .
The collection consists of , Halo 2 : Anniversary , Halo 3 , and Halo 4 , which were originally released on earlier Xbox platforms .
Each game in the release received a graphical upgrade , with Halo 2 receiving a high - definition redesign of its audio and visuals that are exclusive to the collection .
The game includes access to the live - action series as well as the multiplayer beta that was available for a limited time .
Each game in the compilation retained its original story and gameplay , with the exception of Halo 2s cutscenes which were extended by Blur Studio .
The collection 's multiplayer features every map originally released with each title , including six remastered Halo 2 maps .
Critics generally praised The Master Chief Collection for its updated audio and visuals , as well as its quantity of content , but criticized the multiplayer aspect of the collection due to a significant number of bugs and poor matchmaking experiences .
Many of these technical issues were later fixed in a number of post - release patches .
On May 30 , 2015 , the campaign mode of was made available for the collection .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
The Master Chief Collection consists of , the anniversary edition of Halo 2 , Halo 3 , and Halo 4 , complete with their full catalog of extras , including all multiplayer maps and gameplay modes .
There have been no story or gameplay changes to the original releases .
The games are first - person shooters with vehicular combat that takes place from a third - person perspective .
All four campaign modes can be played alone or cooperatively via split screen or Xbox Live .
Each campaign has four difficulty levels and access to gameplay modifiers known as " Skulls " .
As in Combat Evolved Anniversary , Halo 2 players can swap between the original and upgraded graphics on the fly .
Additions to Halo 2s campaign mode include " Terminals " , and new prologue and epilogue cutscenes to link the series for Halo 5s debut .
Since only six of the game 's multiplayer maps were remastered , there are two Halo 2 multiplayer modes .
The Halo 2 anniversary multiplayer mode uses the six remastered maps , while the standard Halo 2 multiplayer mode includes all of the original game 's released maps with a full graphical update but no remastering .
The Collection multiplayer includes Mission Setlists , curated lists of levels selected from throughout the series .
The Extras menu includes access to live - action video series and the multiplayer beta , until it was removed prior to the game 's release .
The compilation features new Achievements , and all difficulty and play modes are unlocked from the start .
The game launched with a total of 4,000 Gamerscore spread across 400 Achievements — the largest amount of Gamerscore given to a game since its introduction — with another 500 Gamerscore , spread across 50 Achievements , being released in a day - one update .
With the release of Spartan Ops a few months later , an additional 50 Achievements , worth 500 Gamerscore , were released .
In May 2015 , another 100 Achievements , worth a total of 1,000 Gamerscore , were released alongside Halo 3 : ODST .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
The collection was developed by 343 Industries in conjunction with Certain Affinity , Ruffian Games , Saber Interactive , Blur Studio , and United Front Games .
Following the announcement of The Master Chief Collection at the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2014 , Phil Spencer , head of Microsoft 's Xbox division , stated that the collection originally began as just a remastering of Halo 2 to celebrate its 10-year anniversary .
343 Industries decided that it would be a great opportunity to release the other main Halo titles for the Xbox One in preparation for the 2015 release of Halo 5 : Guardians .
All of the games run at 60 frames per second and have received lighting upgrades ; all but the Halo 2 remake have a native resolution of 1080p .
On October 18 , 2014 , the game had been declared gold , indicating it was being prepared for duplication and release .
Combat Evolved Anniversary is based on the high - resolution remaster of the original released in 2011 for the Xbox 360 .
Kinect features from the Xbox 360 version are not supported in the Xbox One collection .
Stereoscopic 3D features from the Xbox 360 version are not supported in the Xbox One collection .
Ruffian Games was responsible for developing the Halo 3 and Halo 4 ports .
Halo 3 and Halo 4 received only a simple lighting upgrade , and an increase in both frame rate and rendering resolution .
343 Industries designed the interfaces and online networking .
United Front Games worked on the unified interface that works across all games .
Coinciding with the release of The Master Chief Collection , 343 Industries developed the Halo Channel , an application for the Xbox One and Microsoft Windows .
It is a successor to the Halo Waypoint app that was released on the Xbox 360 .
The Xbox One app is integrated with the collection , allowing players to access Halo : Nightfall and " Terminal " animations , unlock rewards for the game , and launch the games directly from the app .
HALO 2 ANNIVERSARY Section::::Halo 2 Anniversary .
Saber Interactive , which co - developed Combat Evolved Anniversary , assisted in the remake of Halo 2s campaign .
It received a complete visual overhaul .
The game 's soundtrack and sound effects , such as weapon audio , were updated as well .
The refined Halo 2 cutscenes , as well as two new cutscenes created to complement the Halo 5 : Guardians story line , were produced by Blur Studio .
They feature the same structure and timing of the originals , and motion capture was utilized for the animation .
" Terminals " , a feature first introduced in Halo 3 , were added to the Halo 2 Anniversary campaign .
Their purpose was to create a " connective tissue " for stories within the Halo universe that explores the relationship between the different races within the Covenant and extensively covers the events portrayed in Halo 2 .
Terminals also gave 343 Industries the opportunity to introduce Spartan Locke , a main character in Halo 5 : Guardians .
Visual effect studio The Sequence Group collaborated with 343 Industries to provide the animation ; the group had previously performed similar work in Combat Evolved Anniversary and Halo 4 .
Several voice actors reprised their roles including Keith David as the Arbiter , John DiMaggio as the Heretic Leader , and Tim Dadabo as 343 Guilty Spark .
Mike Colter provided the voice - over for Spartan Locke .
Once the Halo 2 Anniversary project was green - lit , executive producer Dan Ayoub at 343 Industries reached out to Max Hoberman of Certain Affinity for assistance on the multiplayer component .
Hoberman originally designed Halo 2s multiplayer and founded Certain Affinity after leaving Bungie in 2006 .
Certain Affinity was asked to remake several of the multiplayer maps from Halo 2 .
The team found it difficult to decide how many of the original 24 maps to redesign and eventually settled on six – two small , two medium , and two large – to provide some variation .
Along with the visual upgrade , Halo 2s original score was re - recorded with the San Francisco Symphony at Skywalker Sound studio .
Guitarist Steve Vai returned to the franchise to play on additional tracks with Periphery guitarist Misha Mansoor .
The Halo 2 Anniversary soundtrack was released on November 11 , 2014 .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
On June 9 , 2014 , Halo : The Master Chief Collection was announced at the Electronic Entertainment Expo with a trailer titled " Hunter and the Hunted " .
The trailer was created by animation company Digital Domain , which had previously collaborated on other Halo commercials .
The trailer recreates a moment from Halo 2 , in which the Master Chief rides a bomb into a Covenant ship .
It is narrated by Keith David , who voices the Arbiter .
Several other trailers were released prior to launch , showcasing the updated cinematics and Terminals featured in Halo 2 Anniversary , and gameplay from all titles across the collection .
On October 31 , 2014 , 343 Industries released a documentary , Remaking the Legend – Halo 2 : Anniversary , chronicling the history of Halo 2 and the development of Halo 2 : Anniversary ; it also features interviews with developers at Bungie and 343 Industries .
The documentary was initially broadcast on Twitch.tv , and was later available on the Halo Channel , Xbox Video , and YouTube .
In August 2014 , UK retailer Game revealed two special editions of The Master Chief Collection .
The " Limited " edition includes a steel book case , a map book , and an in - game modifier , while the " Mjolnir " edition includes all the content from the Limited edition , along with a statue of the Master Chief .
In October 2014 , Microsoft announced a white Master Chief Collection Xbox One bundle for Brazil and other " select markets " .
A second Xbox One bundle containing the collection was announced for release in the United States during March 2015 .
The collection was released worldwide in November 2014 .
343 Industries confirmed that the collection would be available to download from the Xbox Games Store on the day of release .
A 15-gigabyte patch went live to those who had digitally preordered it through the Xbox Games Store on November 6 , 2014 .
Players who preordered through the Xbox Games Store also received early access to the " Boom " Skull , which provides double the explosion physics in the Halo : Combat Evolved and Halo 2 campaign mode ; it became available to all other users on December 12 , 2014 .
POST - RELEASE Section::::Post - release .
At launch , many players experienced problems with online matchmaking modes .
343 Industries released numerous updates to address these issues .
On November 24 , 2014 , Bonnie Ross , head of 343 Industries , issued a public apology noting issues " that have resulted in a frustrating experience , including long matchmaking times and low session success rates " .
On December 19 , 2014 , Microsoft announced that as an apology for the issues , it would give a free month of Xbox Live Gold , a special avatar and nameplate , and a free downloadable copy of the Halo 3 : ODST campaign to those who played the game between its launch and December 19 , 2014 .
The campaign mode of ODST was released to the public on May 30 , 2015 , and with it , 100 additional Achievements .
It is available to purchase separately to those who are not eligible for a free code for the add - on .
Spartan Ops , the episodic content originating in Halo 4 , was released as downloadable content for The Master Chief Collection on December 22 , 2014 .
Additional Achievements for Spartan Ops and the multiplayer mode were released on January 8 , 2015 .
Halo : Nightfall — a series of weekly , episodic digital videos directed by Sergio Mimica - Gezzan and produced by Ridley Scott — launched soon after the collection was released .
The series was designed to connect the stories of previous Halo games to the upcoming Halo 5 .
The Halo 5 beta launched on December 29 , 2014 , and ran until January 18 , 2015 .
With the release of The Master Chief Collection , Microsoft and 343 Industries announced an official competitive gaming league , the Halo Championship Series ( HCS ) .
343 Industries partnered with the Electronic Sports League , live - streaming platform Twitch.tv , and other tournament organisers to foster the competitive multiplayer community in Halo .
The first season of HCS , featuring Halo 2 : Anniversarys multiplayer , launched in November 2014 and ran until March 2015 .
It served as a test bed for ideas and future plans that 343 Industries has for esports in Halo 5 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Halo : The Master Chief Collection received generally positive reviews .
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave it a score 85 out of 100 based on reviews from 69 critics .
Reviews praised the graphics , frame rate , and content included in the bundle , but criticized the prominent matchmaking issues that prevented players from playing online multiplayer modes on release day .
The technical issues deeply affected the game 's online experience .
Forbes Paul Tassi wrote the game on release " was just flat out broken " , and though improvements have been made , it " may very well be the worst major game release in a decade . "
Stuart Andrews of Trusted Reviews commented that " Halo 3 looks and feels surprisingly dated " when compared to the rest of the collection , particularly Halo 2 and Halo 4 .
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS