JANE
THE VIRGIN Jane the Virgin is an American satirical romantic comedy drama developed by Jennie Snyder Urman , that debuted on The CW on October 13 , 2014 .
It is a loose adaptation of the Venezuelan telenovela Juana la Virgen created by Perla Farías .
The series stars Gina Rodriguez as Jane Villanueva , a working , religious young Latina virgin , who becomes pregnant after accidentally being artificially inseminated .
The program parodies commonly used tropes and devices in Latin telenovelas .
At the 72nd Golden Globe Awards , Jane the Virgin was nominated for the award for Best Television Series – Musical or Comedy , received the Peabody Award , and Gina Rodriguez won the award for Best Actress – Television Series , Musical or Comedy .
It was also named a TV Program of the Year by the American Film Institute .
Beginning with the fourth episode of season three , the series ' on - screen title card was modified , with " The Virgin " crossed out in favor of a substitute each episode .
This mirrored the storyline , in which Jane is no longer a virgin .
On April 2 , 2018 , The CW renewed the series for a fifth and final season .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
Set in Miami , the series details the surprising and dramatic events that take place in the life of Jane Gloriana Villanueva , a hard - working , religious , young , Venezuelan - American woman .
Jane 's vow to save her virginity until marriage becomes complicated when a doctor mistakenly artificially inseminates her during a checkup .
To make matters worse , the biological father is a married man , a former playboy , and a cancer survivor who is not only the new owner of the hotel where Jane works , but was also her former teenage crush .
In addition to adjusting to pregnancy and then motherhood , in the initial episodes Jane is faced with questions about her professional future and the daunting prospect of choosing between the father of her baby or her detective boyfriend .
As the series evolves , the issues shift as her child grows into a toddler , her writing career moves forward , and her family members likewise develop independent plotlines .
CAST MAIN * Gina Rodriguez as Jane Gloriana Villanueva , a 23-year - old , religious young Latina who becomes pregnant after being artificially inseminated by mistake while being engaged to Michael .
After meeting Rafael and hearing his situation , she agrees to carry the baby full term and turn over custody to him and his wife Petra , but only if she is sure her baby will be safe and loved with them .
Jane breaks off the engagement with Michael due to him keeping secrets from her regarding the Solanos .
But , as the pregnancy grows , Rafael and Jane start to have feelings for each other , but the relationship does n't last very long .
Jane ends up having a baby boy named Mateo Gloriano Rogelio Solano Villanueva .
She marries Michael Cordero in the season two finale .
In the tenth episode of season three , she becomes widowed when he dies from his gunshot wound .
After trying to find a letter which Michael wrote her while he was alive , her ex - boyfriend Adam comes back into her life , bringing out her fun side , which had been hidden after giving birth .
Adam soon leaves for a job offer .
She later finds her feelings resurfacing for Rafael again .
Executive producer Jennie Snyder Urman stated that Gina Rodriguez " was literally the third person that came in " during the casting .
* Jenna Ortega as Young Jane , at age 10 , is the most frequent ( 21 chapters as of season 3 ) of the four younger " Janes " seen in flashbacks .
* Andrea Navedo as Xiomara " Xo " Gloriana Villanueva , Jane 's outgoing mother .
She was only sixteen years old when she had Jane , which is why Jane would rather keep her virginity until marriage than make the same mistake her mother did .
She is a dance teacher , but dreams of having a singing career .
She marries Jane 's father in the Season three finale .
In the end of Season 4 , she is diagnosed with breast cancer .
* Catherine Toribio plays a younger Xiomara during some flashback sequences .
* Justin Baldoni as Rafael Solano , the 31-year - old owner of the Marbella Hotel and the biological father of Jane 's child , who has fallen out of love with his wife .
As the series progresses , he develops growing feelings for Jane , and divorces Petra after discovering her affair .
In season two , he has two daughters with Petra and , in season three , briefly goes to jail .
In season four , he and Jane grow closer and it is thought he would propose .
* Yael Grobglas as Petra Solano ( birthname :
Natalia Andel , later Natalia Dvoracek ) , Rafael 's scheming wife and a member of a shady Czech crime family who got married to Rafael in order to steal his wealth , though over time she did fall in love with him .
She later divorces Rafael and in Season 2 , inseminates herself with Rafael 's sperm and gives birth to their twin daughters , Anna and Ellie ( formally Elsa but changed due to Petra hating the " Frozen " references ) .
She is then convicted for the murder of her twin sister , causing her to meet her lawyer Jane .
Lawyer Jane and Petra grow closer and then fall in love .
* Ivonne Coll as Alba Gloriana Villanueva , Jane 's pious maternal grandmother .
She is highly religious , and encourages Jane to save her virginity until marriage .
While she is able to speak English , she only speaks Spanish with her family , even when they address her in English .
She was in the country illegally until she got her green card in season two .
In season 4 she becomes a citizen of America .
She falls in love with her boss Jorge .
Jorge proposes to Alba , but she denies it .
Soon she realizes that that was a mistake
but Jorge had moved on .
At the end of Season 4 , Alba and Jorge get married to help him meet his mother who lives out of the country .
* Brett Dier as Michael Cordero Jr. ( seasons 1–3 , 5 ; guest season 4 ) , Jane 's 29-year - old husband who was a detective .
He is aware of Petra 's affair , and blackmails her to ensure that her marriage remains intact , so that Jane will give the baby to them , however later he decides to support Jane 's decision to keep the baby .
He also dislikes Rafael due to Jane 's , and eventually Rafael 's , attraction to one another .
He is the head detective in the hunt for Sin Rostro , a high - profile drug dealer who seems to be based in the Marbella Hotel , however he gets shot
while searching for Sin Rostro , he later quits to become a lawyer .
Jane and Michael get married in the season two finale .
He apparently dies in season three by an aortic dissection caused by a gunshot .
In the Season 4 finale , it is revealed that Michael is still alive .
* Jaime Camil as Rogelio de la Vega , a self - involved , famous telenovela star and Jane 's biological father .
He is currently trying to gain a relationship with his newly discovered daughter .
He also has feelings for Xiomara , who was his girlfriend in high school .
He marries Xiomara in the season three finale .
He desperately wants a child and has one with Darci Factor .
They later have the child and named it Baby Michaelina de la Vega Factor .
* Elias Janssen as Mateo Gloriano Rogelio Solano Villanueva ( season 4 ) , Jane and Rafael 's baby .
Named after Jane 's grandfather and Alba 's husband , who died before Jane was born .
* Aria Rose Garcia as toddler Mateo Gloriano Rogelio Solano Villanueva .
Joseph Sanders played the role in the third season .
* Anthony Mendez ( voice over ) as the Latin Lover Narrator ; Third - person omniscient .
The narration features both metanarration and metafiction .
RECURRING
* Yara Martinez as Dr. Luisa Alver , Rafael 's lesbian , neurotic , recovering alcoholic sister , and the doctor who accidentally artificially inseminated Jane .
She later has a relationship with her step mother , Sin Rostro / Rose .
* Bridget Regan as Rose , a former lawyer , former girlfriend of Luisa , and eventually stepmother of Luisa and Rafael who defends Luisa against the malpractice suit .
She is later revealed to be the crime lord Sin Rostro , and is arrested in season three .
* Megan Ketch as Susanna Barnett ( season 2 ) , Michael 's partner who was in fact Rose in disguise .
After being discovered , she shot Michael in the chest .
Before this she has a relationship with Luisa .
* Elisabeth Röhm as Eileen ( season 3 ) , the second woman whose identity Rose steals for the next three years .
In the meantime , the real Eileen murdered Scott .
* Mia and Ella Allan as Anna and Elsa Solano ( season 2–present ) , Petra and Rafael 's twin daughters as a result of Petra 's artificial insemination .
* Carlo Rota as Emilio Solano ( season 1 ) , Luisa 's biological father and Rafael 's adopted father .
He is murdered by his wife , Rose .
* Michael Rady as Lachlan Moore ( seasons 1 - 2 ) , Rafael 's rival and Petra 's former fiancé .
* Diane Guerrero as Lina Santillan , Jane 's best friend and co - worker .
* Azie Tesfai as Detective Nadine Hansan ( seasons 1 - 2 ) , a police detective and rival , partner , and brief lover to Michael .
She was killed taking a bullet that was meant for Michael , after she was revealed to be working with Sin Rostro .
* Priscilla Barnes as Magda Andel , Petra 's mother .
She is confined to a wheelchair ( but only pretends to be paraplegic ) and she is Petra 's co - conspirator in her plot to steal Rafael 's hotel and wealth .
While imprisoned , she was still working against Petra from inside ; she is now out .
*
Yael Grobglas also portrays Anezka ( seasons 2 - 4 ) , Petra 's long - lost twin sister who grew up with a rough life in the Czech Republic .
At the end of the second season she drugs Petra and begins a scheme with Magda to impersonate Petra so they can gain controlling shares in the Marbella .
She is then murdered by her sister , Petra .
* Adam Rodriguez as Jonathan Chavez ( season 2 , 4 ) , one of Jane 's teachers at grad school and briefly her love interest .
Later found out that he is known for affairs with students .
* Alano Miller as Roman Zazo ( season 1 ) , Rafael 's best friend and Petra 's lover .
He is believed to be murdered in the hotel , causing tension for everyone , including Petra and Rafael .
* Miller also portrays Aaron Zazo ( season 1 ) , Roman 's twin brother , who appears from " Chapter Fourteen " onwards investigating his brother 's murder , is later revealed to be Roman ; it was Aaron who was murdered .
Roman is later killed , in self - defense , by Petra .
* Shelly Bhalla as Krishna ( season 2-present ) , Petra 's assistant , formerly Rafael 's assistant .
She is believed to be blackmailing Petra in season 4 , but it turns out that she was the one being blackmailed .
* Ricardo Chavira as Bruce ( season 3 ) , Xiomara 's boyfriend of three years who she becomes briefly engaged to , only to break things off due to her lingering feelings for Rogelio .
* Justina Machado as Darci Factor ( seasons 3-present ) , Rogelio 's ex - girlfriend and the mother of her and Rogelio 's daughter
" Baby Michaelina de la Vega Factor " .
She runs a matchmaking business .
* Alfonso DiLuca as Jorge ( seasons 3-present ) , Alba 's love interest , later boyfriend .
Then becomes her husband .
* Johnny Messner as Chuck Chesser ( seasons 3-present ) , the new owner of the rival hotel to the Marbella who serves as a new love interest for Petra .
* Francisco San Martin as Fabian ( seasons 3 - 4 ) ,
Rogelio 's costar on telenovela Los Viajes de Guillermo who has a brief fling with Jane .
* Tyler Posey as Adam Alvaro ( seasons 3 - 4 ) , Jane 's first love and later boyfriend , who is bisexual .
* Rosario Dawson as Jane Ramos ( season 4 ) , Petra 's attorney and love interest .
SERIES
OVERVIEW PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On June 27 , 2013 , American television network The CW announced that it was planning to release a new show based on the Venezuelan soap opera Juana La Virgen .
On February 23 , 2014 , Entertainment Weekly announced that Rodriguez would play the title role of Jane Villanueva .
On May 8 , 2014 , during The CW 's 2014–2015 upfronts , the series was officially picked up .
On July 18 , 2014 , an extended trailer was released by The CW .
On August 8 , 2014 , it was announced that White Collars Bridget Regan and Azie Tesfai would join the series as respectively Rose , a former lawyer , and Detective Nadine Hansan , a police detective and rival to Dier 's character .
On August 10 , 2014 , TVLine announced that Melrose Place and Emily Owens , M.D. actor Michael Rady would join the series as Lachlan .
Filming for season one commenced on July 28 , 2014 .
The show is filmed on soundstages in Los Angeles and the pilot was filmed in Huntington Beach , California .
On October 21 , 2014 , the show was given a full season order .
On January 11 , 2015 , the show was renewed for a second season , set to air during the 2015–16 television season .
Its second season premiered on October 12 , 2015 .
On March 11 , 2016 , the show was renewed for a third season , which premiered on October 17 , 2016 .
On January 8 , 2017 , The CW renewed the series for a fourth season that premiered on October 13 , 2017 .
On April 2 , 2018 , The CW renewed the series for a fifth and final season , which will air in 2019 .
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
Jane
the Virgin premiered on The CW on October 13 , 2014 , during the 2014–15 television season .
Unique to the CW , it is the network 's only program to feature a Spanish language audio track on the second audio program channel ; however , as many CW stations usually do not carry the SAP channel due to a lack of need , this is more limited than the major networks , which are required by the FCC to have a SAP channel for the Descriptive Video Service track , which as a minor network the CW is not required to carry .
The show premiered in Canada on Global TV and in Australia on Fox8 on December 1 , 2014 .
The first two seasons aired in the United Kingdom on E4 .
, with the first - run episodes on UK Netflix from season 3 onwards .
Sony Channel broadcast the series throughout Southeast Asia as replacements of Sony Entertainment Television in the region ( including BeTV in the Philippines ) .
In Canada , new episodes are added each week to the streaming service Shomi , in addition to cable carriage by some providers of American CW affiliates ( Chicago 's WGN - TV , available as a superstation in Canada , carried the series ' first two seasons until it ended its CW affiliation before the 2016 - 17 television season ) .
The show premiered in New Zealand on July 24 on Prime .
In the Philippines , Jane the Virgin premiered on ABS - CBN on March 28 , 2016 , dubbed in Filipino .
The show replaced the local drama series You 're My Home on a late - night timeslot , as part of the Primetime BIDA evening block .
Days before the premiere , a teaser showing Gina Rodriguez promoting the show was also released .
Sana2X by Angeline Quinto was the themesong for the Tagalized broadcast of Jane the Virgin .
ABS - CBN only aired the first two seasons , locally editing and splitting the episodes into half - hour segments similar to the network 's teleserye and anime programs .
For a total of 74 modified episodes , the season - two finale aired on July 8 , 2016 , being replaced by on July 11 , 2016 . RECEPTION Rotten
TomatoesMetacritic CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Critical response .
Jane the Virgin has received praise for its writing and Rodriguez 's performance .
Review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes gives the first season of the show a " certified fresh " rating of 100 % based on 50 reviews , with a rating average of 7.7 out of 10 .
The site 's consensus states , " Jane the Virgin dubious premise has become part of its unlikely charm – along with delightfully diverse writing and a knockout performance by Gina Rodriguez .
" Metacritic , another review aggregator , gives the show a score of 80 out of 100 , based on 23 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
The second season also received critical acclaim .
On Metacritic , the season holds an 87 out of 100 , based on four reviews , indicating " universal acclaim " .
Rotten Tomatoes gave it a rating of 100 % based on 11 reviews and a rating average of 9.7 out of 10 .
The site 's consensus reads , " Jane the Virgin stays true to its over - the - top telenovela roots in season two while layering in more humor and increasingly complex storytelling . "
Maureen Ryan of Variety praised the show , saying that the series " is envisioned , edited and curated with great deftness and economy , and the fact that it is so entertaining and accessible should not preclude it from being at the center of conversations about the best the medium has to offer . "
CRITICS ' TOP TEN LISTS
*
No .
3 TV Guide
*
No . 3
The Salt Lake Tribune
*
No . 6 TV.com
*
No . 7 Las Vegas Weekly
*
No . 8 Sioux City Journal
*
No . 10
" Boston Globe * – American Film Institute * – Associated Press * –
Chicago Reader
* –
Huffington Post * – Los Angeles Times
* – Philadelphia Daily News * – ScreenCrush
*
No . 3 "
Village Voice
*
No .
4 Vulture
*
No .
4 Slate *
No . 5
The Salt Lake Tribune
*
No . 6 Las Vegas Weekly
*
No . 7
TV.com * – Boob Tube Dude
* –
Criticwire
* –
Variety
* –
The Week
*
No . 1 Variety * No .
2 Boob Tube Dude * No . 8 MTV * – CNN
* No . 6
Variety
*
No .
9 TV by the Numbers
*
No . 9 USA Today RATINGS ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
The show has been acknowledged by the People 's Choice Awards , Golden Globe Awards , Critics ' Choice Awards , the Primetime Emmy Awards , the Image Awards and the Television Critics Association as well as honored by the American Film Institute and the George Foster Peabody Awards . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Recipients !
Outcome America Film Institute Award AFI Television Program Of The Year Jane
the Virgin TV Guide Award Favorite New Show Jane
the Virgin People 's Choice Award Favorite New TV Comedy Jane the Virgin rowspan="2"Golden Globe Award Best Television Series –
Musical or Comedy Jane the Virgin Best Actress – Television Series Musical or Comedy Gina Rodriguez Peabody Award Honoree Jane the Virgin rowspan="3"Critics ' Choice Award Best Comedy Series Jane the Virgin Best Actress in a Comedy Series Gina Rodriguez Best Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series Jaime Camil TV Line Performer of the Week
Honoree Jaime Camil TV Line Performer of the Week
Honoree
Gina Rodriguez rowspan="5"Teen Choice Award
Choice TV Actor :
Comedy Jaime Camil Choice TV Actress :
Comedy Gina Rodriguez Choice TV :
Breakout Show Jane
the Virgin Choice TV :
Breakout Star Gina Rodriguez Choice TV :
Liplock Gina Rodriguez & Justin Baldoni rowspan="3"Television Critics Association Award Outstanding New Program
Jane
the Virgin Outstanding Achievement in Comedy Jane the Virgin Individual Achievement in Comedy
Gina Rodriguez rowspan="6"Imagen Award Best Primetime Television Program –
Comedy Jane
the Virgin Best Actress – Television Gina Rodriguez rowspan=2Best
Supporting Actor –
Television Justin Baldoni Jaime Camil rowspan=2Best
Supporting Actress – Television Ivonne Coll
Andrea Navedo rowspan="3"Gold Derby Award
Best Comedy Series
Jane
the Virgin Best Comedy Lead Actress
Gina Rodriguez Breakthrough
Performer Gina Rodriguez rowspan="3"EWwy Award Best Comedy Series
Jane
the Virgin Best Actress – Comedy Gina Rodriguez
Best Supporting Actor – Comedy Jaime Camil Emmy Award Outstanding Narrator Anthony Mendez Voice Arts Award Outstanding Narration – TV or Film , Best Voice over Anthony Mendez Gotham Award Breakthrough Series –
Long Form Jane
the Virgin Dorian Award Campy TV Show of the Year
Jane
the Virgin rowspan="2"Online Film and Television Association Award Best Actress
Gina Rodriguez
Best Guest Actress Rita Moreno Maxwell Weinberg Award
Arpi KetendjianCBS Studios NHMC Impact Gala Award Honoree Gina Rodriguez HOLA Award
Breakthrough Performance Andrea Navedo
rowspan="3"GiRL POWER Media Role Model Award Honoree
Gina Rodriguez
Honoree Andrea Navedo Honoree Ivonne Coll rowspan="3"International Drama Award Best Mini - Series Jane
the Virgin Best Actress
Gina Rodriguez
Best Director Brad Silberling
Paleyfest LA
Honoree Jane
the Virgin rowspan="2"Satellite Award Best Television Series – Musical or Comedy Jane
the Virgin Best Actress – Television Series
Musical or Comedy Gina Rodriguez rowspan="3"NAACP Image Award Outstanding Actress in a Comedy Series Gina Rodriguez Outstanding Writing in a Comedy Series Jennie Snyder Urman Outstanding Directing in a Comedy Series Brad Silberling Golden Globe Award Best Actress – Television Series
Musical or Comedy Gina Rodriguez rowspan="3"Critics ' Choice Award Best Comedy Series Jane
the Virgin Best Actress in a Comedy Series Gina Rodriguez Best Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series Jaime Camil TV Line Performer of the Week
Honoree Yael Grobglas Golden Reel Award
Best Sound Editing Susan Ham
, Sharyn Gersh GMS Award Best Music Supervision Kevin J. Edelman rowspan="3"The
Women 's Image Award Best Actress in a Comedy Gina Rodriguez Best Comedy Series Jane the Virgin Outstanding Writing in a Series Jennie Snyder Urman Artios Award Outstanding Achievement in Casting - Comedy Alyson Silverberg , Jonathan Clay Harris rowspan="2"Frijolywood Award /Frijoldeoro
Award Screenwriter in Comedy Carolina Rivera Best Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series Jaime Camil NHMC Impact Award Outstanding Performance in a Comedy Series Andrea Navedo rowspan="4"Cine Award Best Comedy Series Jane the Virgin Best Actress in a Comedy Series Gina Rodriguez Best Supporting Actor Jaime Camil Best Supporting Actress Ivonne Coll Young Artist Award Best Performance in a TV Series
Madison Rojas rowspan="3"Teen Choice Award Choice TV :
Comedy Jane
the Virgin Choice TV :
Actor Jaime Camil Choice TV : Actress Gina Rodriguez Emmy Award Outstanding Narrator Anthony Mendez rowspan="2"EWwy Award Best Actress – Comedy Gina Rodriguez
Best Supporting Actor – Comedy Jaime Camil rowspan="4"Imagen Award Best Primetime Television Program –
Comedy Jane
the Virgin Best Actress – Television Gina Rodriguez
Best Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series Jaime Camil
Best Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series Andrea Navedo TV Line Performer of the Week
Honoree
Gina Rodriguez Golden Globe Award Best Actress – Television Series
Musical or Comedy Gina Rodriguez rowspan="2"People 's Choice Award Favorite TV Comedy Jane the Virgin Favorite TV Comedy Actress
Gina Rodriguez Black Reel Award Outstanding Actress , Comedy Series
Gina Rodriguez
rowspan="2"MTV Award Best American Story Jane the Virgin Best Actor in a Show
Gina Rodriguez GMS Award Best Music Supervision
Kevin J. Edelman rowspan="3"Teen Choice Award
Choice Comedy TV Show
Jane
the Virgin Choice Comedy TV Actress
Gina Rodriguez
Choice Comedy TV Actor Jaime Camil rowspan="3"Imagen Award Best Primetime Television Program –
Comedy Jane
the Virgin
Best Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series Jaime Camil
Best Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series Ivonne Coll rowspan="5"2018 MTV Award Best Kiss Gina Rodriguez & Justin Baldoni rowspan="4"Teen Choice Award Choice Comedy TV Show Jane the Virgin Choice Comedy TV Actress Gina Rodriguez
Choice Comedy TV Actor Jaime Camil Choice Liplock Gina Rodriguez & Justin Baldoni HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Warner Home Entertainment originally released Season 1 on DVD , but poor sales caused a switch in distribution rights with CBS now releasing every season of Jane the Virgin as manufacture - on - demand Blu - ray and DVDs exclusively on Amazon going forward in addition to a manufacture - on - demand reissue of Season 1 . ! scope="col " rowspan="2 " Name !
scope="col " colspan="3 " DVD ! scope="col
" colspan="2 " Blu - ray ! scope="col " rowspan="2 " No . ofepisodes !
scope="col " rowspan="2 " Features ! scope="col " Region 1 ! scope="col " Region 2 ! scope="col
" Region 4 ! scope="col " Region A ! scope="col " Region B * Immaculate Creation – ' Behind the Scenes '
* Getting to Know the
Cast * Gag reel
* Deleted scenes scope="row " The Complete Second Season * Deleted scenes scope="row " The Complete Fourth Season NOVEL Section::::Novel .
A tie - in novel , based on the book Jane writes in the show , has been published .
The story is a historical romance set in Miami during 1902 .
In the series , the book 's plot is inspired by the love story of Jane and Michael . !
Title ! !
Published ! !
Publisher Snow Falling November 14 , 2017 Simon & Schuster REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS