REGULATION OF ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES Regulation of electronic cigarettes varies across countries and states , ranging from no regulation to banning them entirely .
Others have introduced strict restrictions and some have licensed devices as medicines such as in the UK .
, around two thirds of major nations have regulated e - cigarettes in some way .
Because of the potential relationship with tobacco laws and medical drug policies , e - cigarette legislation is being debated in many countries .
The companies that make e - cigarettes have been pushing for laws that support their interests .
In 2016 the US Department of Transportation banned the use of e - cigarettes on commercial flights .
This regulation applies to all flights to and from the US .
The legal status of e - cigarettes is currently pending in many countries .
Many countries such as Brazil , Singapore , the Seychelles , and Uruguay have banned e - cigarettes .
In Canada , they are technically illegal to sell , as no nicotine - containing e - cigarette is approved by Health Canada , but this is generally unenforced and they are commonly available for sale Canada - wide .
In the US and the UK , the use and sale to adults of e - cigarettes are legal .
As of August 8 , 2016 , the US Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) extended its regulatory power to include e - cigarettes .
Under this ruling the FDA will evaluate certain issues , including ingredients , product features and health risks , as well their appeal to minors and non - users .
The FDA rule also bans access to minors .
A photo ID is required to buy e - cigarettes , and their sale in all - ages vending machines is not permitted .
In May 2016 the FDA used its authority under the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act to deem e - cigarette devices and e - liquids to be tobacco products , which meant it intended to regulate the marketing , labelling , and manufacture of devices and liquids ; vape shops that mix e - liquids or make or modify devices were considered manufacturing sites that needed to register with FDA and comply with good manufacturing practice regulation .
E - cigarette and tobacco companies have recruited lobbyists in an effort to prevent the FDA from evaluating e - cigarette products or banning existing products already on the market .
In February 2014 the European Parliament passed regulations requiring standardization and quality control for liquids and vaporizers , disclosure of ingredients in liquids , and child - proofing and tamper - proofing for liquid packaging .
In April 2014 the FDA published proposed regulations for e - cigarettes .
In the US some states tax e - cigarettes as tobacco products , and some state and regional governments have broadened their indoor smoking bans to include e - cigarettes .
As of 9 October 2015 , at least 48 states and 2 territories banned e - cigarette sales to minors .
E - cigarettes have been listed as drug delivery devices in several countries because they contain nicotine , and their advertising has been restricted until safety and efficacy clinical trials are conclusive .
Since they do not contain tobacco , television advertising in the US is not restricted .
Some countries have regulated e - cigarettes as a medical product even though they have not approved them as a smoking cessation aid .
A 2014 review stated the emerging phenomenon of e - cigarettes has raised concerns in the health community , governments , and the general public and recommended that e - cigarettes should be regulated to protect consumers .
It added , " heavy regulation by restricting access to e - cigarettes would just encourage continuing use of much unhealthier tobacco smoking . "
A 2014 review said these products should be considered for regulation in view of the " reported adverse health effects " .
EUROPE Section::::Europe .
On 19 December 2012
the European Commission adopted its proposal to revise the European Union Tobacco Products Directive 2001/37 / EC which included proposals to introduce restrictions on the use and sales of e - cigarettes .
On 8 October 2013 the European Parliament in Strasbourg voted down the Commission 's proposal to introduce medical regulation for e - cigarettes , but proposed that cross - border marketing of e - cigarettes be regulated similarly to tobacco products , meaning that sales of e - cigarettes to under-18s would be prohibited in the European Union , along with most cross - border advertising .
Warning labels also would be required .
The Parliament and Member States are involved in trilogue discussions to reach a common conclusion .
In February 2014 , the European Parliament approved new regulations for tobacco products , including e - cigarettes .
The new regulations forbid advertising of e - cigarettes , set limits on maximum concentrations of nicotine in liquids , limit maximum volumes of liquid that can be sold , require child - proof and tamper - proof packaging of liquid , set requirements on purity of ingredients , require that the devices deliver consistent doses of vapor , require disclosure of ingredients and nicotine content , and empower regulators to act if the regulations are violated .
In October 2014 e - cigarette manufacturer Totally Wicked won the right to challenge the directive at the Court of Justice of the EU .
The hearing took place on 1 October 2015 and the results will not be announced until early 2016 .
In autumn 2013 , the e - cigarette industry ran " a determined lobbying campaign " to defeat proposed European legislation to regulate e - cigarettes like medical devices .
Pharmaceutical manufacturers GlaxoSmithKline and Johnson & Johnson have lobbied the US government , the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) , and the EU parliament for stricter regulation of e - cigarettes which compete with their products Nicorette gum and nicotine patches .
UNITED STATES
FEDERAL REGULATION Section::::United States .
Section::::Federal regulation .
Prior to 8 August 2016 , regulations concerning the use of e - cigarettes varied considerably across the United States , although there is more variation regarding laws limiting their use by youth than regarding multi - level regulations , such as banning their use in public places .
The FDA classified e - cigarettes as drug delivery devices and subject to regulation under the Food , Drug , and Cosmetic Act ( FDCA ) before importation and sale in the US .
The classification was challenged in court , and overruled in January 2010 by Federal District Court Judge Richard J. Leon , explaining that " the devices should be regulated as tobacco products rather than drug or medical products . "
In March 2010 , the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia stayed the injunction pending an appeal , during which the FDA argued the right to regulate e - cigarettes based on their previous ability to regulate nicotine replacement therapies such as nicotine gum or patches .
Further , the agency argued that tobacco legislation enacted the previous year " expressly excludes from the definition of ' tobacco product ' any article that is a drug , device or combination product under the FDCA , and provides that such articles shall be subject to regulation under the pre - existing FDCA provisions . "
On 7 December 2010 , the appeals court ruled against the FDA in a 3–0 unanimous decision , ruling the FDA can only regulate e - cigarettes as tobacco products , and thus can not block their import .
The judges ruled that such devices would only be subject to drug legislation if they are marketed for therapeutic use – E - cigarette manufacturers had successfully proven that their products were targeted at smokers and not at those seeking to quit .
The District Columbia Circuit appeals court , on 24 January 2011 , declined to review the decision en banc , blocking the products from FDA regulation as medical devices .
In April 2014 , the FDA proposed new regulations for tobacco products , including e - cigarettes .
The regulations require disclosure of ingredients used in e - cigarette liquids , proof of safety of those ingredients , and regulation of the devices used to vaporize and deliver the liquid .
The FDA proposed regulation would ban the sale of e - cigarettes with nicotine to any individual under 18 years of age .
In August 2014 , attorneys general from over two dozen states advised the FDA to enact restrictions on e - cigarettes , including banning flavors .
On 10 May 2016 , the FDA published their deeming regulations in the Federal Register , which were to take effect on 8 August 2016 .
Vendors and companies had until two years afterward to prepare paperwork with the FDA to have their product remain on the market .
Currently , there are lawsuits and amendments made in the works in Congress to change that provision .
The lack of research on the risks and possible benefits has resulted in precautionary policymaking in the US " which often lacks grounding in empirical evidence and results in spatially uneven diffusion of policy " .
The time by which applications to market regulated non - combustible tobacco product devices must be submitted for review has been extended to August 8 , 2022 .
As of 8 August 2016 , the FDA extended its regulatory power to include e - cigarettes .
Under this ruling the FDA will evaluate certain issues , including ingredients , product features and health risks , as well their appeal to minors and non - users .
The FDA rule also bans access to minors .
A photo ID is required to buy e - cigarettes , and their sale in all - ages vending machines is not permitted .
The FDA in September 2016 has sent warning letters for unlawful underage sales to online retailers and retailers of e - cigarettes .
FDA regulations have also applied to the advertising of e - cigarettes since 2016 .
Per FDA regulations , e - cigarettes , e - liquid , and associated products can not be advertised as safer than other tobacco products unless they have received modified risk tobacco product ( MRTP ) status . , this status has not been granted to any e - cigarette or e - liquid product .
Though no companies have applied for an MRTP permit for their vaping products , similar heat - not - burn tobacco products have been denied MRTP status on the grounds that they are not safer than traditional cigarettes .
On December 5 , 2016 HUD passed a rule banning the use of tobacco products in common areas and within each home unit .
HUD did not include e - cigarettes in their list of prohibited tobacco products , and they will allow each public housing agency to make that decision .
The ban includes cigarettes , cigars , pipes and waterpipes ( hookahs ) .
E - cigarettes were not included because they believe there would be no maintenance cost savings or a lowered risk of destructive fires .
HUD commented that there is a lack of evidence that the vapor causes any damage to the units .
Beginning in May 2018 , the FDA began to crack down on e - liquid brands whose packaging resembles food or beverage products .
FDA is particularly concerned about e - liquids whose packaging resembles that of candy , juice boxes , and other products intended to appeal to children , because of concern that children will mistakenly drink the e - liquid and die of nicotine poisoning .
Nicotine is especially toxic to young children , and a 60 ml bottle of e - liquid with 11 mg / ml nicotine concentration , the average e - liquid bottle in the U.S. , is likely to kill a child of age 4 or younger .
As such , the FDA has charged e - liquid products with branding that resembles food , candy , or beverage items as being misbranded and using false advertising , which is illegal under the Tobacco Control Act of 2009 ( specifically sections 903(a)(1 ) and 903(a)(7)(A ) of the Food , Drug , and Cosmetic Act , ) .
STATE REGULATION Section::::State regulation .
Effective 8 August 2016 , all US states will follow the same , uniform federal guidelines .
With an absence of federal regulations , many states and cities had adopted their own e - cigarette regulations , most commonly to prohibit sales to minors , including Maryland , Kentucky , Minnesota , New Jersey , New Hampshire , Tennessee , Utah , Wisconsin , and Colorado .
Other states are considering similar legislation .
Several US cities and states have enacted laws that increased the legal age to purchase e - cigarettes to age 21 .
, some states in the US permit e - cigarettes to be taxed as tobacco products , and some state and regional governments in the US had extended their indoor smoking bans to include e - cigarettes .
Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger vetoed a bill that would regulate the sale of e - cigarettes within the state on grounds that " if adults want to purchase and consume these products with an understanding of the associated health risks , they should be able to do so . "
A review of regulations in 40 U.S. states found that how a law defines e - cigarettes is critical , with some definitions allowing e - cigarettes to avoid smoke - free laws , taxation , and restrictions on sales and marketing .
Less policies have been created to restrict vaping indoors than with cigarette smoking .
Many local and state jurisdictions have recently begun enacting laws that prohibit e - cigarette usage everywhere that smoking is banned , although some state laws with comprehensive smoke - free laws will still allow for vaping to be permitted in bars and restaurants while prohibiting e - cigarettes in other indoor places .
As of August 2016 , the United States Navy is considering banning e - cigarettes .
A 2017 report stated " As of 2 October 2015 , five US states and over 400 counties have implemented some form of restriction of ECIG use indoors .
International policies are more varied with certain restrictions for ECIG use in UK airports and trains and reports of complete ECIG bans in indoor public places for Malta , Belgium and Spain " .
San Francisco banned the sale of flavored e - liquids in 2018 .
They are the first city in the US to enact such a ban .
OTHER COUNTRIES
Section::::Other countries .
( see also Electronic cigarettes in Australia ) :
The Federal Department of Health and Ageing classifies every form of nicotine , except for replacement therapies and cigarettes , as a form of poison .
In Australia , there are no laws pertaining to the regulation of e - cigarettes .
Although there are a number of laws that are relevant to the regulation of poisons , therapeutic goods , and tobacco control which are applicable to e - cigarettes in certain cases .
Australia is developing regulations on e - cigarettes .
The sale of e - cigarettes must be registered with the Therapeutic Goods Administration ( TGA ) before being sold .
Importation of e - cigarettes and their related products , if they claim to help people quit smoking , is illegal unless approved by the TGA .
The TPA has said that there were no laws preventing the importation of e - cigarettes bought over the internet for personal use , unless prohibited by state and territory legislation .
State laws in Australia 's various states are a little bit conflicting .
According to the Poisons Standard of 2010 , inhaled nicotine is Pharmacy Only , or a Schedule 2 medication when used to help quit smoking .
In April 2014 a court decision made it illegal to sell or supply e - cigarettes regardless of their appearance or nicotine content ( even if zero ) in Western Australia .
Previously they were banned if they looked like cigarettes .
The court ruled that the action they provided in and of itself looks like cigarettes .
Precise rules in the other states vary .
The states of Karnataka , Kerala , Punjab , Jammu and Kashmir , Mizoram and Maharashtra have banned e - cigarettes under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act , 1940 , and Food Safety & Standards ( Prohibition and Restriction on Sales ) Regulation , 2011 .
In August 2018 , the Central Government had asked the states to ban all types of Electronic Nicotine Delivery Systems .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Database of laws regulating e - cigarettes by country — from the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health