STRANGE CASE OF DR JEKYLL AND MR HYDE Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde is a gothic novella by Scottish author Robert Louis Stevenson , first published in 1886 .
The work is also known as The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde , Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde , or simply Jekyll & Hyde .
It is about a London lawyer named Gabriel John Utterson who investigates strange occurrences between his old friend , Dr Henry Jekyll , and the evil Edward Hyde .
The novella 's impact is such that it has become a part of the language , with the very phrase " Jekyll and Hyde " entering the vernacular to refer to people with an unpredictably dual nature : usually very good , but sometimes shockingly evil .
INSPIRATION AND WRITING Section::::Inspiration and writing .
Stevenson had long been intrigued by the idea of how human personalities can affect how to incorporate the interplay of good and evil into a story .
While still a teenager , he developed a script for a play about Deacon Brodie , which he later reworked with the help of W. E. Henley and which was produced for the first time in 1882 .
In early 1884 , he wrote the short story " Markheim " , which he revised in 1884 for publication in a Christmas annual .
According to his essay , " A Chapter on Dreams " ( Scribner 's , Jan. 1888 ) , he racked his brains for an idea for a story and had a dream , and upon wakening had the intuition for two or three scenes that would appear in the story Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr. Hyde .
Biographer Graham Balfour quoted Stevenson 's wife Fanny Stevenson :
In the small hours of one morning,[ ... ]I was awakened by cries of horror from Louis .
Thinking he had a nightmare , I awakened him .
He said angrily : " Why did you wake me ?
I was dreaming a fine bogey tale .
" I had awakened him at the first transformation scene .
Lloyd Osbourne , Stevenson 's stepson , wrote : " I do n't believe that there was ever such a literary feat before as the writing of Dr Jekyll .
I remember the first reading as though it were yesterday .
Louis came downstairs in a fever ; read nearly half the book aloud ; and then , while we were still gasping , he was away again , and busy writing .
I doubt if the first draft took so long as three days . "
Inspiration may also have come from the writer 's friendship with Edinburgh - based French teacher Eugene Chantrelle , who was convicted and executed for the murder of his wife in May 1878 .
Chantrelle , who had appeared to lead a normal life in the city , poisoned his wife with opium .
According to author Jeremy Hodges , Stevenson was present throughout the trial and as " the evidence unfolded he found himself , like Dr Jekyll , ' aghast before the acts of Edward Hyde ' . "
Moreover , it was believed that the teacher had committed other murders both in France and Britain by poisoning his victims at supper parties with a " favourite dish of toasted cheese and opium " .
Louis Vivet , a mental patient who was suffering from dissociative identity disorder , caught Frederic W. H. Myers 's attention and he wrote to Stevenson after the story was published .
Stevenson was polite in his response but rejected that reading .
As was customary , Mrs Stevenson would read the draft and offer her criticisms in the margins .
Robert Stevenson was confined to bed at the time from a haemorrhage .
Therefore , she left her comments with the manuscript and Robert in the toilet .
She said that in effect the story was really an allegory , but Robert was writing it as a story .
After a while , Robert called her back into the bedroom and pointed to a pile of ashes : he had burnt the manuscript in fear that he would try to salvage it , and in the process forced himself to start again from nothing , writing an allegorical story as she had suggested .
Scholars debate whether he really burnt his manuscript ; there is no direct factual evidence for the burning , but it remains an integral part of the history of the novella .
Stevenson re - wrote the story in three to six days .
A number of later biographers have alleged that Stevenson was on drugs during the frantic re - write ; for example , William Gray 's revisionist history A Literary Life ( 2004 ) said he used cocaine while other biographers said he used ergot .
However , the standard history , according to the accounts of his wife and son ( and himself ) , says he was bed - ridden and sick while writing it .
According to Osbourne , " The mere physical feat was tremendous and , instead of harming him , it roused and cheered him inexpressibly " .
He continued to refine the work for four to six weeks after the initial re - write .
The novella was written in the southern English seaside town of Bournemouth , where Stevenson had moved due to ill health , to benefit from its sea air and warmer southern climate .
The name Jekyll was borrowed from Reverend Walter Jekyll , a friend of Stevenson and younger brother of horticulturalist and landscape designer Gertrude Jekyll .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Gabriel John Utterson and his cousin Richard Enfield reach the door of a large house on their weekly walk .
Enfield tells Utterson that months ago he saw a sinister - looking man named Edward Hyde trample a young girl after accidentally bumping into her .
Enfield forced Hyde to pay £ 100 to avoid a scandal .
Hyde brought them to this door and provided a cheque signed by a reputable gentleman ( later revealed to be Doctor Henry Jekyll , a friend and client of Utterson ) .
Utterson is disturbed because Jekyll recently changed his will to make Hyde the sole beneficiary .
Utterson fears that Hyde is blackmailing Jekyll .
When Utterson tries to discuss Hyde with Jekyll , Jekyll turns pale and asks that Hyde be left alone .
One night in October , a servant sees Hyde beat to death Sir Danvers Carew , another of Utterson 's clients .
The police contact Utterson , who leads officers to Hyde 's apartment .
Hyde has vanished , but they find half of a broken cane .
Utterson recognizes the cane as one he had given to Jekyll .
Utterson visits Jekyll , who shows Utterson a note , allegedly written to Jekyll by Hyde , apologising for the trouble that he has caused .
However , Hyde 's handwriting is similar to Jekyll 's own , leading Utterson to conclude that Jekyll forged the note to protect Hyde .
For two months , Jekyll reverts to his former sociable manner , but in early January , he starts refusing visitors .
Dr Hastie Lanyon , a mutual acquaintance of Jekyll and Utterson , dies of shock after receiving information relating to Jekyll .
Before his death , Lanyon gives Utterson a letter to be opened after Jekyll 's death or disappearance .
In late February , during another walk with Enfield , Utterson starts a conversation with Jekyll at a window of his laboratory .
Jekyll suddenly slams the window and disappears .
In early March , Jekyll 's butler , Mr. Poole , visits Utterson and says Jekyll has secluded himself in his laboratory for weeks .
Utterson and Poole break into the laboratory , where they find Hyde wearing Jekyll 's clothes and apparently dead from suicide .
They find a letter from Jekyll to Utterson .
Utterson reads Lanyon 's letter , then Jekyll 's .
Lanyon 's letter reveals his deterioration resulted from the shock of seeing Hyde drink a serum that turned him into Jekyll .
Jekyll 's letter explains that he had indulged in unstated vices and feared discovery .
He found a way to transform himself and thereby indulge his vices without fear of detection .
Jekyll 's transformed personality , Hyde , was evil , self - indulgent , and uncaring to anyone but himself .
Initially , Jekyll controlled the transformations with the serum , but one night in August , he became Hyde involuntarily in his sleep .
Jekyll resolved to cease becoming Hyde .
One night , he had a moment of weakness and drank the serum .
Hyde , furious at having been caged for so long , killed Carew .
Horrified , Jekyll tried more adamantly to stop the transformations .
Then , in early January , he transformed involuntarily while awake .
Far from his laboratory and hunted by the police as a murderer , Hyde needed help to avoid capture .
He wrote to Lanyon ( in Jekyll 's hand ) , asking his friend to bring chemicals from his laboratory .
In Lanyon 's presence , Hyde mixed the chemicals , drank the serum , and transformed into Jekyll .
The shock of the sight instigated Lanyon 's deterioration and death .
Meanwhile , Jekyll 's involuntary transformations increased in frequency and required ever larger doses of serum to reverse .
It was one of these transformations that caused Jekyll to slam his window shut on Enfield and Utterson .
Eventually , one of the chemicals used in the serum ran low , and subsequent batches prepared from new stocks failed to work .
Jekyll speculated that one of the original ingredients must have some unknown impurity that made it work .
Realizing that he would stay transformed as Hyde , Jekyll decided to write his " confession " .
He ended the letter by writing , " I bring the life of that unhappy Henry Jekyll to an end . "
CHARACTERS GABRIEL JOHN UTTERSON Section::::Characters .
Section::::Gabriel John Utterson .
Gabriel John Utterson , a lawyer and loyal friend of Jekyll and Lanyon , is the main protagonist of the story .
Utterson is a measured and at all times emotionless , bachelor – who nonetheless seems believable , trustworthy , tolerant of the faults of others , and indeed genuinely likable .
Utterson has been close friends with Lanyon and Jekyll .
However , Utterson is not immune to guilt , as , while he is quick to investigate and judge the faults of others even for the benefit of his friends , Stevenson states that " he was humbled to the dust by the many ill things he had done " .
Whatever these " ill things " may be , he does not partake in gossip or other views of the upper class out of respect for his fellow man .
Often the last remaining friend of the down - falling , he finds an interest in others ' downfalls , which creates a spark of interest not only in Jekyll but also regarding Hyde .
He comes to the conclusion that human downfall results from indulging oneself in topics of interest .
As a result of this line of reasoning , he lives life as a recluse and " dampens his taste for the finer items of life " .
Utterson concludes that Jekyll lives life as he wishes by enjoying his occupation .
Utterson is a good , kind , loyal and honest friend to Henry Jekyll .
DR HENRY JEKYLL / MR EDWARD HYDE Section::::Dr
Henry Jekyll / Mr Edward Hyde .
Dr Jekyll is a " large , well - made , smooth - faced man of fifty with something of a slyish cast " , who occasionally feels he is battling between the good and evil within himself , upon leading to the struggle between his dual personalities of Henry Jekyll and Edward Hyde .
He has spent a great part of his life trying to repress evil urges that were not fitting for a man of his stature .
He creates a serum , or potion , in an attempt to mask this hidden evil within his personality .
However , in doing so , Jekyll transpired into the smaller , younger , cruel , remorseless , evil Hyde .
Jekyll has many friends and an amiable personality , but as Hyde , he becomes mysterious and violent .
As time goes by , Hyde grows in power .
After taking the potion repeatedly , he no longer relies upon it to unleash his inner demon , i.e. , his alter ego .
Eventually , Hyde grows so strong that Jekyll becomes reliant on the potion to remain conscious .
RICHARD ENFIELD
Section::::Richard Enfield .
Richard Enfield is Utterson 's cousin and is a well known " man about town . "
He first sees Hyde at about three in the morning in an episode that is well documented as Hyde is running over a little girl .
He is the person who mentions to Utterson the actual personality of Jekyll 's friend , Hyde .
Enfield witnessed Hyde running over a little girl in the street recklessly , and the group of witnesses , with the girl 's parents and other residents , force Hyde into writing a cheque for the girl 's family .
Enfield discovers that Jekyll signed the cheque , which is genuine .
He says that Hyde is disgusting looking but finds himself stumped when asked to describe the man .
DR HASTIE LANYON Section::::Dr
Hastie Lanyon .
A longtime friend of Jekyll 's , Hastie Lanyon disagrees with Jekyll 's " scientific " concepts , which Lanyon describes as " ... too fanciful " .
He is the first person to discover Hyde 's true identity ( Hyde transforms himself back into Jekyll in Lanyon 's presence ) .
Lanyon helps Utterson solve the case when he describes the letter given to him by Jekyll and his thoughts and reactions to the transformation .
When Lanyon witnesses the transformation process ( and subsequently hears Jekyll 's private confession , made to him alone ) , Lanyon becomes critically ill and later dies of shock .
MR .
POOLE Section::::Mr .
Poole .
Poole is Jekyll 's butler who has lived with him for many years .
Upon noticing the reclusiveness and changes of his master , Poole goes to Utterson with the fear that his master has been murdered and his murderer , Mr Hyde , is residing in the chambers .
Poole serves Jekyll faithfully and attempts to do a good job and be loyal to his master .
Yet events finally drive him into joining forces with Utterson to find the truth .
INSPECTOR NEWCOMEN Section::::Inspector Newcomen .
Utterson joins this Scotland Yard inspector after the murder of Sir Danvers Carew .
They explore Hyde 's loft in Soho and discover evidence of his depraved life .
SIR DANVERS CAREW , MP Section::::Sir Danvers Carew , MP .
A kind , white - haired old man and a Member of Parliament .
The maid claims that Hyde , in a murderous rage , killed Carew in the streets of London on the night of 18 October ( sometime between 11 pm and 2 am by the testimony of the maid ) .
At the time of his death , Carew is 70 years old and is carrying on his person a letter addressed to Utterson , and they find one half of one of Jekyll 's walking sticks on his body .
As a result , they later go and investigate in Jekyll 's house , but can not find him ; they later enter a house where Hyde has been living and find the other half of the stick in one of Hyde 's rooms .
MAID Section::::Maid .
A maid , whose employer Hyde had once visited , is the only person who claims to have witnessed the murder of Sir Danvers Carew .
She states that she saw Hyde murder Carew with Jekyll 's cane and his feet .
Having fainted after seeing what happened , she then wakes up and rushes to the police , thus initiating the murder case of Sir Danvers Carew .
ANALYSIS OF THEMES Section::::Analysis of themes .
Literary genres which critics have applied as a framework for interpreting the novel include religious allegory , fable , detective story , sensation fiction , Doppelgänger literature , Scottish devil tales , and gothic novel .
DUALITIES Section::::Dualities .
The novella is frequently interpreted as an examination of the duality of human nature , usually expressed as an inner struggle between good and evil , with variations such as human versus animal , civilization versus barbarism sometimes substituted , the main thrust being that of an essential inner struggle between the one and other , and that the failure to accept this tension results in evil , or barbarity , or animal violence , being projected onto others .
In Freudian theory , the thoughts and desires banished to the unconscious mind motivate the behaviour of the conscious mind .
Banishing evil to the unconscious mind in an attempt to achieve perfect goodness can result in the development of a Mr Hyde - type aspect to one 's character .
In Christian theology , Satan 's fall from Heaven is due to his refusal to accept that he is a created being ( that he has a dual nature ) and is not God .
This idea is suggested when Hyde says to Lanyon , shortly before drinking the famous potion , " ... and your sight shall be blasted by a prodigy to stagger the unbelief of Satan .
" This is because in Christianity , pride ( to consider oneself as without sin or without evil ) is a sin , as it is the precursor to evil itself .
In his discussion of the novel , Vladimir Nabokov argues that the " good versus evil " view of the novel is misleading , as Jekyll himself is not , by Victorian standards , a morally good person in some cases .
PUBLIC VS PRIVATE Section::::Public
vs private .
The work is commonly associated today with the Victorian concern over the public and private division , the individual 's sense of playing a part and the class division of London .
In this respect , the novella has also been noted as " one of the best guidebooks of the Victorian era " because of its piercing description of the fundamental dichotomy of the 19th century " outward respectability and inward lust , " as this period had a tendency for social hypocrisy .
SCOTTISH NATIONALISM VS UNION WITH BRITAIN Section::::Scottish nationalism vs union with Britain .
Another common interpretation sees the novella 's duality as representative of Scotland and the Scottish character .
In this reading , the duality represents the national and linguistic dualities inherent in Scotland 's relationship with the wider Britain and the English language , respectively , and also the repressive effects of the Church of Scotland on the Scottish character .
A further parallel is also drawn with the city of Edinburgh itself , Stevenson 's birthplace , which consists of two distinct parts : the old medieval section historically inhabited by the city 's poor , where the dark crowded slums were rife with all types of crime , and the modern Georgian area of wide spacious streets representing respectability .
RECEPTION PUBLICATION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Publication .
Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde was initially sold as a paperback for one shilling in the UK , as noted above , and for one dollar in the U.S.
These books were called " shilling shockers " or penny dreadfuls .
The American publisher issued the book on 5 January 1886 , four days before the first appearance of the UK edition issued by Longmans ; Scribner 's published 3000 copies , only 1250 of them bound in cloth .
Initially , stores would not stock it until a review appeared in The Times , on 25 January 1886 , giving it a favourable reception .
Within the next six months , close to forty thousand copies were sold .
As Stevenson 's biographer , Graham Balfour , wrote in 1901 , the book 's success was probably due rather to the " moral instincts of the public " than to any conscious perception of the merits of its art .
It was read by those who never read fiction and quoted in pulpit sermons and in religious papers .
By 1901 , it was estimated to have sold over 250,000 copies in the United States .
THE STAGE VERSION OF STRANGE CASE OF DR .
JEKYLL AND MR .
HYDE Section::::The stage version of Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde .
Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde , though it had initially been published as a " shilling shocker , " was an immediate success and is one of Stevenson 's best - selling works .
Stage adaptations began in Boston and London and soon moved all across England and then towards his home country of Scotland .
The first stage adaptation followed the story 's initial publication in 1886 .
Richard Mansfield bought the rights from Stevenson , and worked with Boston author Thomas Russell Sullivan to write a script .
The resulting play added to the cast of characters , and adds some elements of romance to the plot .
Addition of female characters to the originally male - centered plot has continued in later adaptations of the story .
The first performance of the play took place in the Boston Museum in May 1887 .
The lighting effects and makeup for Jekyll 's transformation into Hyde created horrified reactions from the audience , and the play was so successful that production followed in London .
After a successful ten weeks in London in 1888 , Mansfield was forced to close down production .
The hysteria surrounding the Jack the Ripper serial murders led even those who only played murderers on stage to be considered suspects .
When Mansfield was mentioned in London newspapers as a possible suspect for the crimes , he shut down production .
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
There have been numerous adaptations of the novella including over 120 stage and film versions alone .
There have also been many audio recordings of the novella , with some of the more famous readers including Tom Baker , Roger Rees , Christopher Lee , Anthony Quayle , Martin Jarvis , Tim Pigott - Smith , John Hurt , Ian Holm , Gene Lockhart and Richard Armitage .
A Musical was created by Frank Wildhorn , Steve Cuden , and Leslie Bricusse : " Jekyll & Hyde : The Gothic Musical Thriller - The Complete Work " ( 1994 ) .
ILLUSTRATED VERSIONS Section::::Illustrated versions .
S. G. Hulme Beaman illustrated a 1930s edition .
REFERENCES
FURTHER
READING
* Borinskikh L. I. ( 1990c ) .
" The method to reveal a character in the works of R.L. Stevenson [ The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde ] " .
In
* * * ( ed . )
The Problem of character in literature .
Tchelyabinsk : Tchelyabinsk State University .
Pp .
31–32 .
( In Russian , German and Hindi . )
* Richard Dury , ed .
( 2005 ) .
The Annotated Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde . , over 80 pages of introduction material , extensive annotation notes , 40 pages of derivative works and extensive bibliography .
* Paul M. Gahlinger , ( 2001 ) .
Illegal Drugs :
A Complete Guide to their History , Chemistry , Use , and Abuse .
Sagebrush Medical Guide .
p. 41 . .
* Kathrine Linehan , ed .
( 2003 ) .
Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde .
Norton Critical Edition , contains extensive annotations , contextual essays and criticisms .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde from Internet Archive .
Many antiquarian illustrated editions .
* ver.1 *
" The Beast Within " , Freudian fable , sexual morality tale , gay allegory – the novella has inspired as many interpretations as it has film adaptations .
By James Campbell , The Guardian , 13 December 2008 * 1950 Theatre Guild on the Air radio adaptation at Internet Archive