A WALK IN THE WOODS ( FILM )
A Walk in the Woods is a 2015 American biographical comedy - drama film directed by Ken Kwapis , based on the 1998 book / memoir of the same name by Bill Bryson .
The film stars Robert Redford , Nick Nolte and Emma Thompson , and was released on September 2 , 2015 , by Broad Green Pictures .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Author Bill Bryson ( Robert Redford ) , after living for ten years in the UK , returned to New Hampshire .
Now in his 60s , he had been living there peacefully for the past twenty years .
A television interview reports that he has published several popular books and there is speculation he will be writing more .
Bryson , however , has no such plans .
Bryson and his wife Catherine ( Emma Thompson ) attend a funeral .
Not being an outgoing person , he afterwards takes a stroll up to the nearby Appalachian Trail .
He suddenly decides he will hike its entire length .
Catherine objects , presenting all kinds of accounts about accidents and murders on the trail .
She relents on condition that he not travel alone .
He agrees and searches for a friend willing to join him .
Everyone declines his invitation ; some declare him insane .
Finally , he is contacted by Stephen Katz ( Nick Nolte ) , an old friend who offers to be a hiking companion .
Despite appearances , Stephen claims to be fit enough for the challenge .
Bill 's wife is unhappy with his choice , but relents .
Within less than a mile of their departure point , as groups of hikers overtake and pass them , they begin to grasp the difficulty of their ambition .
Shortly after , a group of young children effortlessly runs by them up the trail , laughing and calling out to each other .
Seeing others pass by so easily motivates them to carry on .
And so they move on , day by day , making more or less pleasant acquaintances , having more or less pleasant experiences .
Some time later they reach a hut , having hiked miserably through pouring rain .
Carved into the log wall is an Appalachian Trail map showing the trail and their present location .
They realize they have finished less than half of the trail after spending three months on it .
Eventually they trek into a restricted section posted " for experienced hikers only " .
While maneuvering their heavy and awkward backpacks alongside a precipitous drop , Bill trips and pulls Stephen with him down a steep , rocky cliff .
They fall about fifteen feet onto a ledge spacious enough to be comfortable , but far enough below the trail to be unable to get back up to resume the hike .
They spend the night there with no clear hope of rescue .
Luckily , the next day they are awakened by early morning hikers who are able to get them off the ledge .
Eventually , they decide they have had enough and end their journey .
When comfortably back at home , Bill , going through his mail , finds a series of post cards from Stephen that were mailed from their various stops along the trail .
The last one reads : " What 's next ? '
Bill sits down and begins typing on his computer , " A WALK IN THE WOODS . "
CAST
* Robert Redford as Bill Bryson * Nick Nolte as Stephen Katz * Emma Thompson as Catherine Bryson * Kristen Schaal as Mary Ellen * Nick Offerman as REI Dave
* Mary Steenburgen as Jeannie PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The project dates back to at least 2005 , at which Robert Redford first announced his plans to make the film .
At various points directors such as Chris Columbus , Barry Levinson and Larry Charles were attached .
However , Ken Kwapis ended up directing the picture .
Redford initially wanted Paul Newman to costar in the film with him , to the point where Redford temporarily abandoned the project after Newman 's death , unable to picture any other actor suitable for the role .
However , while directing The Company You Keep , Redford was so impressed by the performance of Nick Nolte that he was eventually cast in the role .
Redford said of the project : Larry Charles ( of Borat and Brüno ) was briefly attached as director , but eventually the job went to Ken Kwapis , whose most recent film was Big Miracle and who was a key figure on the U.S. television series The Office .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography of the film began on May 5 , 2014 , in Los Angeles .
Exterior locations were largely filmed at Amicalola Falls State Park , in Dawsonville , Georgia , including scenes at The Lodge at Amicalola Falls .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film premiered at the Sundance Film Festival on January 23 , 2015 .
Shortly after , Broad Green Pictures acquired distribution rights to the film , and gave it a wide theatrical release starting September 2 , 2015 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
A Walk in the Woods has received mixed reviews from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds a rating of 46 % , based on 146 reviews , with an average rating of 5.4/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Amiable yet less compelling than any road trip movie starring Robert Redford and Nick Nolte should be , A Walk in the Woods is ultimately a bit too pedestrian . "
On Metacritic , the film has a score of 51 out of 100 , based on 30 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
On CinemaScore , audiences gave the film an average grade of " B " on an A+ to F scale .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * www.walkinthewoodsmovie.com — official site