FALLEN ( 2016 FILM )
Fallen is a 2016 American romantic fantasy drama film directed by Scott Hicks , based on Lauren Kate 's 2009 novel of same name .
The film stars Addison Timlin , Jeremy Irvine , Harrison Gilbertson , and Joely Richardson .
The film was originally set to be released in fall 2015 , but it was confirmed by author Lauren Kate that it would be released in 2016 for countries including Malaysia , Philippines and Singapore .
Lotus Entertainment will distribute the film , the release was on November 10 in the Philippines , Singapore and Malaysia , confirmed by Kate .
It is still unknown when Fallen will be released in Australia .
The film saw a theatrical release in the United Kingdom on March 10 , 2017 .
On August 2 , 2017 Lauren Kate confirmed that Fallen was scheduled to be released in the United States by Vertical Entertainment .
It was released direct - to - VOD on August 8 , 2017 , and October 10 , 2017 on DVD / Blu - ray .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Lucinda " Luce " Price is sent to " Sword and Cross " , a reform / college prep school for young adults , after she is blamed for the death of Trevor , a boy who Luce once had a crush on .
After they kissed , Trevor was killed in a fire shortly after Luce saw the " shadows " ; paranormal , ink - like smudges that Luce has been seeing since childhood .
Upon arriving at her new school , Luce meets various students , including Cameron " Cam " , who has taken an interest in her ; Arriane Alter , who takes Luce under her wing ; Molly Zane , who harasses Luce ; Pennyweather " Penn " , whom Luce befriends ; and Daniel .
She also meets Miss Sophia , a religious scholar teacher .
During detention ( picking up trash ) , Luce is almost crushed by an avenging angel statue .
Later , Cam flirts with Luce and almost kisses her before inviting her to a party .
At the party , Luce begins to develops a crush on Cam , but this is hindered by her constant feeling of an unusual connection with Daniel .
Molly then shows up , then proceeds to harass and almost kill Luce before Arriane intervenes .
As Luce leaves , she sees the " shadows " again .
Luce overhears Sophia telling Daniel that Cam may have been behind the angel statue almost falling on Luce .
The two then realize that Luce is listening to them , and Daniel goes after Luce .
After he finds her , he reveals that , during class , he was working on a graphic novel .
In this novel , a boy and a girl are in love with each other , but are cursed such that every time they kiss , the girl dies ; the girl then reincarnates , meets the boy ( who never ages or changes ) 17 years later , and they kiss again , only for the cycle to repeat .
Cam lures Luce to a club , where he tries to kiss her , only to be violently interrupted by Daniel , who yells that he had told Cam to stay away from Luce ; Luce , fleeing the scene , then tells Penn what happened .
Penn and another boy , Todd , help Luce sneak into the school and discover a photo from 1854 of Daniel and Luce .
As Penn wanders off to retrieve the photo from the printer , Luce goes to the library , where she sees the " shadows " again .
Another mysterious fire then occurs that ends up engulfing the library and killing Todd .
Daniel rescues an unconscious Luce from the fire .
Luce finds Daniel on a roof top , where it is revealed that Luce and Daniel are the boy and girl from Daniel 's graphic novel , and that Daniel is a fallen angel , which explains his immortality .
The two kiss , but Cam arrives , telling Luce that she has not been baptized , meaning that Lucifer will come for her .
He tries to convince Luce to pick him instead of Daniel , but Daniel whisks Luce away and drops her off with Sophia , leaving to fight Cam and keep Lucifer from coming for Luce .
As the two fight , Cam reveals that he was not the one behind Luce 's murder ; meanwhile , Sophia kills Penn .
Luce screams , causing Daniel to come to Luce 's aid and protect her from Sophia , who was actually the one trying to kill Luce .
Sophia justifies her murders by explaining that , with Luce gone , Daniel would have been forced to choose a side and order would have been restored .
The shadows show up behind Sophia as she is talking and consume her .
Daniel explains to a visibly shaken Luce that Luce 's lack of a baptism would cause her next death to be permanent ; Sophia thought that this would cause Daniel to choose Heaven .
He also tells her that Lucifer will indeed come for her due to her lack of a baptism .
He tells her that he must take her somewhere safe , which he proceeds to do as the two declare their love for each other .
CAST
* Addison Timlin as Lucinda " Luce " Price * Jeremy Irvine as Daniel Grigori
* Harrison Gilbertson as Cameron " Cam " Briel * Daisy Head as Arriane Alter * Lola Kirke as Pennyweather " Penn " Van Syckle - Lockwood * Sianoa Smit - McPhee as Molly Zane * Hermione Corfield as
Gabrielle " Gabbe " Givens * Malachi Kirby as Roland Sparks * Joely Richardson as Sophia Bliss * Juliet Aubrey as Doreen Price
* Paul Slack as Harry Price
* Leo Suter as Trevor Beckman
* Chris Ashby as Todd Hammond
*
Auguszta Tóth as Todd Hammond 's Mother * David Schaal as Randy *
Norma Kuhling as Rachel
* Richard Ryan as Coach
* Rick Lipton as Detectives PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Lotus Entertainment is the producer in charge of taking the adaptation to the cinema , initially when the novel was bought in December 2009 , the producing company Walt Disney Pictures was the first to buy the whole saga since Fallen ones consists of 5 books and an annex , In total 6 , but by the middle of 2013 , Disney declined and withdrew from the project , leaving all production to Lotus Entertainment .
The post - production began in May 2014 after the recordings were finished in Budapest , Hungary .
PRE - PRODUCTION Section::::Pre - production .
Pre - production started from September 2013 , while recordings began in February 2014 in Budapest , Hungary , recordings were spread over 7 months of recordings , 5 months of tape recordings and 3 months of voice recordings , later the film had been finished in April 2016 , the film was two years in pre - production .
Origo Film Group studios in Budapest were chosen for the film 's production , work on the " angels " flight scenes and the construction of some planes of exterior areas , in the studios , could be analyzed and viewed detail the elaboration and the final work before the introduction of the special effects .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
On August 16 , 2013 , two main characters were announced , Addison Timlin would play Lucinda " Luce " Price and Jeremy Irvine would play Daniel Grigori , both were released by writer Lauren Kate on their website .
Later on September 25 , 2013 it was officially announced that the Australian Harrison Gilbertson would play Cameron " Cam " Briel , the third main character .
On January 19 , 2014 it was officially confirmed in Australia " IF " magazine on its website that Australia 's Sianoa Smit - McPhee would play " Molly " , the antagonistic character .
On February 17 , it was announced by a Twitter message in the official account of the actress Hermione Corfield
her stay in Budapest , days later would confirm her participation in the adaptation of Fallen side in the role of " Gabbe .
"
On March 1 , 2014 actress Juliet Aubrey confirmed her involvement in the adaptation as Luce 's mother , Doreen Price .
On February 18 , 2014 was officially announced that actress Daisy Head would play Arriane Alter , this was released by the father of the actress via Twitter .
On April 9 , 2014 , the remaining members of the rest of the cast were officially announced on the website of Fallen Writer , Lauren Kate .
The actor Malachi Kirby will play Roland Sparks , the English actress Lola Kirke will be the one of life to Penn and Chris Ashby like Todd Hammond , the other actors that already had been confirmed like Hermione Corfield ( Gabbe ) , Daisy Head ( Arriane Alter ) and Sianoa Smit - McPhee ( Molly ) , have also been confirmed by the writer officially on their website , later the rest of the remaining characters were officially confirmed .
Curiously , the actor Jeremy Irvine who incarnated fallen angel ( Daniel ) , was involved in the casting process for other young adult franchises that became adapted into films , such as , The Hunger Games for the role of Peeta Mellark and in Divergent for the role of Tobias ' Four ' Eaton ; both were rejected by him .
Later in the auditions of Fallen , Irvine was fascinated by the script and chose to stay with the project .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
After the change of producers , the producers and the director Scott Hicks began the search of the set , the chosen place was the European country of Hungary ; Approximately 2 km from the capital of Hungary was the place chosen to begin the recordings , but were different places where Dark was recorded , the first was Tura Castle , would be the main enclosure that would conform to Sword & Cross , together with the castle Wenckheim - kastély ( Szabadkígyós ) also located in Hungary , the library would be another enclosure apart where they were filmed , the three buildings formed the reformatory .
Subsequently , filming date had been established at the beginning of September , but was delayed until February 9 , 2014 in Budapest .
There were five months of recordings plus two extra weeks of voice recording between the end of July and August .
The first building forms the classrooms , the reception and the bedrooms , the second building houses the swimming pool and the third building houses the library ; it is noteworthy that the cemetery that is narrated in the book was omitted .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
By the end of 2016 , the trailer for Fallen leaked in the Philippines , the first country to be chosen for the premiere of the film , with low resolution and poor quality of image and sound .
Lotus Entertainment had to re - edit the trailer , modify small scenes and include credits at the end , once it had leaked .
The leak forced the company to set a release date .
It started a speculation about the delay the film suffered for years .
However it was known that Fallen did not have a distribution company .
Later Relativity Media , directed by Ryan Kavanaugh , was interested in distributing it , after several days of negotiation .
In the end the release date was greenlit , with the premiere taking place at the Philippines .
The film was scheduled to be released on September 1 , 2017 , by Vertical Entertainment .
In December 2016 , the film was promoted at the Brazilian Comic - Con Experiencie in São Paulo , where Fallen had its own panel .
A press conference took place with Lauren Kate ( writer of Fallen ) and Addison Timlin ( Lucinda Price ) .
During the event the Brazilian trailer was shown for the fans .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 7 % based on 14 reviews , with an average rating of 3.2/10 .
SEQUELS Section::::Sequels .
In December 2014 , it was announced that Torment , the second installment in the Fallen book series , was in development .
It is unknown whether the last two novels , Passion and Rapture , and the spin - off novel , Unforgiven , will be adapted as well .
In 2017 , producer Kevan Van Thompson asked the fans if they want an adaptation of Torment , leaving the possibility open .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS