INSIDIOUS :
CHAPTER 3
Insidious : Chapter 3 is a 2015 supernatural horror film written and directed by Leigh Whannell in his directorial debut .
It is a prequel to the first two films and the third installment in the Insidious franchise .
The film stars Dermot Mulroney and Stefanie Scott , with Angus Sampson , Whannell , and Lin Shaye reprising their roles from the previous films .
The film was released on June 5 , 2015 , received mixed reviews and grossed $ 113 million against a budget of $ 11 million .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Several years before the Lambert haunting , teenager Quinn Brenner meets with retired demonologist Elise Rainier .
Elise reluctantly agrees to try and contact the spirit of Quinn 's mother , Lillith , who died one year prior .
However , Elise urges Quinn not to try and contact her mother again after sensing a malevolent force .
After auditioning for a school for the performing arts , Quinn sees a mysterious figure waving to her from the distance on the street .
Distracted , she is hit by a car , having both of her legs broken in the process .
Now stuck in her home with her father Sean and brother Alex , Quinn begins to experience increasingly disturbing paranormal phenomena , including seeing visions of a dark spirit wearing an oxygen mask known as the " Man Who Ca n't Breathe"—the same figure that caused her accident .
One of Quinn 's neighbors , an elderly woman with dementia who had previously said several confusing and cryptic things to her about the " Man Who Ca n't Breathe " , passes away .
Sean meets with Elise , who like him is also grieving after the death of her husband Jack , and tries to convince her to help his daughter .
Elise declines , stating that her previous visits to the dark spiritual world of the " Further " made her realize that an evil spirit is hunting her .
However , she is convinced by her friend and former colleague Carl to continue using her spiritual ability , after he reminds her about her successful in 1986 , and stating that she is stronger than any spirits or demons because she is living and they are not .
Due to Elise 's refusal , Alex suggests Sean call on alleged demonologists Specs and Tucker , who have built a following on the internet .
During their investigation , Quinn becomes briefly possessed by the " Man Who Ca n't Breathe , " breaks through her leg braces , and attempts to attack Sean , Specs , and Tucker .
Sean realizes Specs and Tucker are frauds , and prepares to kick the duo out until Elise arrives .
Deducing that the dark spirit 's goal is to lure potential victims to " The Further " so it can eat their life force , Elise decides to enter the spiritual world , and enlists Specs and Tucker to help .
Elise enters the Further and has a brief fight with the evil spirit that haunts her ( a mysterious ) , before she discovers Jack 's spirit .
Jack begins to encourage Elise to commit suicide so that they might be reunited .
Elise realizes that Jack is actually the " Man Who Ca n't Breathe " in disguise and slashes his face before escaping back to the physical world .
Elise realizes that Quinn has to defeat him on her own .
Though Quinn is at first at a disadvantage , Elise receives a message from Quinn 's deceased neighbor : Lillith had left Quinn a letter to read before she graduated High School , but Quinn never found it .
Lillith 's spirit suddenly appears in the Further and helps Quinn defeat the " Man Who Ca n't Breathe . "
Elise gives parting words to the family , including words of encouragement from Lillith 's spirit .
She leaves with Specs and Tucker , and the three agree to form a partnership .
Later , Elise arrives home and notices her dog barking at something .
Suddenly , a demon with a red face appears behind her .
CAST
* Lin Shaye as Elise Rainier
* Dermot Mulroney as Sean Brenner * Stefanie Scott as Quinn Brenner * Angus Sampson as Tucker
* Leigh Whannell as Specs * Hayley Kiyoko as Maggie * Tate Berney as Alex Brenner * Michael Reid MacKay as " The Man Who Ca n't Breathe " * Tom Gallop as Dr. Henderson * Steve Coulter as Carl * Phyllis Applegate as Grace * Ashton Moio as Hector * Ele Keats as Lillith Brenner * Tom Fitzpatrick as Bride in Black / Parker Crane * Adrian Sparks as Jack Rainier
* Phil Abrams as Mel
* Ruben Garfias as Ernesto * James Wan as The Acting School Audition Judge * Amaris Davidson as Nurse
* Garrett Ryan as Young Josh Lambert * Joseph Bishara as Lipstick - Face Demon PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On September 15 , 2013 , a third installment in the Insidious series was announced , with Leigh Whannell signed on to return as writer , and Jason Blum and Oren Peli set to produce .
When asked about returning for another sequel , actor Patrick Wilson went on to say that he " [ does n't ] know where else it could go " , and that " [ Josh Lambert has ] been through the wringer , and I think the movie sets it up well at the end [ ... ]
And that 's great
, that 's how it should end . "
On November 13 , 2013 , it was announced Focus Features and Stage 6
Films would release the film on April 3 , 2015 .
The date was later moved to May 29 , 2015 .
On March 11 , 2014 , Screen Rant reported that the third film would not focus on the Lamberts , but on a new family and story , and would not connect to the last scene in the second film .
It was also reported that both Whannell and Angus Sampson would return as ghost hunters Specs and Tucker , along with Lin Shaye as Elise .
On May 7 , 2014 , Wan tweeted that Whannell would direct the third film , which marks his directorial debut .
In June 2014 , Stefanie Scott and Dermot Mulroney were cast in the film .
On September 22 , 2014 , during the Cinema Diverse Film Festival in Palm Springs , actress Ele Keats said she had recently wrapped an undisclosed supporting role in the film .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography began on July 9 , 2014 , in Los Angeles under the title " Into The Further " , on a scheduled 29-day shoot .
Several scenes were shot in the San Fernando Valley at the Delfino Studios in Sylmar , where the Brenner apartment 's interiors were built .
A first look image was released on July 22 , 2014 .
Filming wrapped on August 18 , 2014 .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The musical score for Insidious :
Chapter 3 is composed by Joseph Bishara , who composed the music for the previous installments .
A soundtrack album for the film was released digitally on June 5 , 2015 by Void Recordings .
MARKETING AND PROMOTION Section::::Marketing and promotion .
A first teaser
poster was released online on September 18 , 2014 , featuring a grey wall with a vent and the red text "
The man who ca n't breathe , the man who lives in the vents , I heard him saying your name last night , I heard him in your room while you were gone , he 's in there right now , standing in your room .
" The first teaser trailer for the film was released by Focus Features on October 23 , 2014 .
The same day director Leigh Whannell invited fans to join him for a live Q&A session on the movie 's official Facebook page .
A few days later , on October 28 , 2014 the same Facebook page reached 4 million fans .
On December 17 , 2014 , fans were invited to connect with Insidious on Kik Messenger for exclusive content .
On March 16 , 2015 , Focus Features debuted a teaser for the full official trailer that was eventually released the following day , on March 17 , 2015 , during a series of launch events in selected cities , including Miami ( where lead star Stefanie Scott held a Q&A session ) , Chicago ( with supporting actress Hayley Kiyoko in attendance ) , and New York City ( where Fangoria magazine hosted a Q&A session with Lin Shaye ) .
A new poster featuring Stefanie Scott was also released the same day .
On July 3 , 2014 , Focus Features moved the already announced US theatrical release date from April 3 to May 29 , 2015 .
On December 10 , 2014 , the distribution company announced that the theatrical release date had been moved back again from May 29 to June 5 , 2015 .
On May 20 , 2015 , Focus Features relaunched their Gramercy Pictures label for action , horror , and science fiction movies .
Insidious :
Chapter 3 was the first release from the revived Gramercy .
RELEASE
BOX OFFICE
Section::::Release .
Section::::Box office .
Insidious :
Chapter 3 grossed $ 52.2 million in North America and $ 60.6 million in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 112.8 million , against a budget of $ 10 million .
In North America , the film made $ 1.6 million from its early Thursday night showings , from 2,150 theaters , and $ 10.4 million on its opening day , from 3,003 theaters .
It finished at third place in its opening weekend , earning $ 23 million behind fellow opener Spy and holdover San Andreas .
Outside North America , Insidious : Chapter 3 grossed $ 14.3 million in its opening weekend , from 42 countries on 2,989 screens , also finishing in third place behind San Andreas and Spy .
It had the biggest opening for a horror film in the Philippines ( $ 1.5 million ) and in Vietnam ( $ 620,000 ) , the second - biggest in Malaysia ( $ 1.6 million ) , and had similarly successful openings in Russia and the CIS ( $ 2.7 million ) .
Mexico opened with $ 1.8 million and India with $ 620,000 . CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes lists a 59 % approval rating based on 121 reviews and a rating average of 5.5/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Insidious : Chapter 3 is n't as terrifying as the original , although it boasts surprising thematic depth and is enlivened by another fine performance from Lin Shaye . "
On Metacritic the film has a score of 52 out of 100 based on 26 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
In CinemaScore polls , cinema audiences gave the film an average score of " B+ " on an A+ to F scale .
Daniel Krupa of IGN awarded it a score of 7.1 out of 10 , saying " Insidious : Chapter 3 is the most focussed , dark , and creepy installment of the series to date . "
Scott Foundas of Variety gave the film a negative review , saying " Chief among things that go bump in the night in Insidious :
Chapter 3 is the movie itself — a thuddingly dull prequel to James Wan 's very enjoyable ( and highly profitable ) demonic - possession horror franchise . "
Justin Lowe of The Hollywood Reporter gave the film a positive review , saying " Insidious : Chapter 3 offers a relatable young protagonist and several key supporting players from the prior films in a nimble setup to the series . "
Kyle Anderson of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a C+ , saying " Insidious Chapter 3 is the worst kind of sequel : Not terrible , but also cartoonishly unnecessary . "
Michael Ordoña of the San Francisco Chronicle rated it zero out of four stars , saying " Insidious : Chapter 3 is simply not scary .
Not a bit , not a whit .
Except that the audience will be terrified of the next stabbing of their eardrums , at generally predictable intervals . "
Michael O'Sullivan of The Washington Post gave the film one - and - a - half stars out of four , saying " The Insidious franchise , after three attempts to exorcise its real demons , still ca n't seem to shake what really haunts it : the ghost of B - movies past . "
Peter Howell of the Toronto Star gave the film two - and - a - half stars out of four , saying " This prequel to the shriek hell , directed and scripted by series writer / actor Leigh Whannell , manages to avoid the Curse of the Triple Cash Grab . "
Kerry Lengel of The Arizona Republic gave the film three out of five stars , saying " Insidious : Chapter 3 is almost more a spoof of a classic like The Exorcist than it is an homage .
It 's not scary horror , it 's silly horror , and the audience is in on the joke . "
Stephen Whitty of the Newark Star - Ledger gave the film two - and - a - half stars , saying " You need more than a few sudden noises and scary shocks to make a good horror movie .
But Insidious : Chapter Three is at least an OK horror movie . "
James Berardinelli of ReelViews gave the film two - and - a - half out of four stars , saying " They say the third time 's the charm .
Not with the Insidious series , it is n't .
Admittedly , installment # 3 is an improvement over # 2 , but it fails to reach the highs of the chilling - but - uneven original . "
Tim Robey of The Telegraph gave the film four out of five stars , saying " It manages the all - important jump scares with the finesse of a skilled stage illusionist , but it 's the surprisingly sincere emotional core that makes it the pick of the series . "
Katie Rife of The A.V. Club gave the film a B- , saying " The motif of grief runs throughout Insidious :
Chapter 3 , which is surprisingly thematically rich for the third installment of a horror franchise .
This emotional undercurrent informs the fright scenes , which otherwise lean rather heavily on jump scares . "
Bilge Ebiri of New York magazine gave the film a negative review , saying " This is so often the problem with this genre — scary setups , followed by dopey resolutions — that you sort of want to give the movie a pass .
But given its distinguished forebears , Insidious : Chapter 3 does n't quite live up to expectations . "
SEQUEL Section::::Sequel .
In an interview
Leigh Whannell was asked " If there is a fourth Insidious film , would that be a sequel to Chapter 3 , another prequel to the original or will it continue in this timeline or go to a whole new timeline ? "
Whannell stated : " I do n't know .
I have n't really thought about it yet .
But for the purposes of this interview , I 'll say that I 'd like to explore the time between this film and the first film .
That whole area there where Elise has rediscovered her gift , I think you could have a lot of adventures before she arrives .
So I think there is a lot of room there .
We 've kind of established Lin [ Shaye ] in this particular film as kind of this superhero , so that would be kind of interesting to explore in the other films . "
SEE ALSO
* List of ghost films REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS