LIST OF MARVEL CINEMATIC UNIVERSE TELEVISION SERIES
The
Marvel Cinematic Universe ( MCU ) television series are American superhero television shows based on characters that appear in publications by Marvel Comics .
The shows have been in production since 2013 , and in that time Marvel Television and ABC Studios , along with its production division ABC Signature Studios , have premiered 11 series across broadcast , streaming , and cable television on ABC , Netflix and Hulu , and Freeform , respectively .
They have at least three more series in various stages of development , with Marvel Studios — the production studio behind the MCU films — having at least three series in development for Disney+ .
The first series in the universe , Marvel 's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , began airing on ABC during the 2013–14 television season , and was joined by Marvel 's Agent Carter in the 2014–15 television season .
Marvel formed a unique partnership with IMAX Corporation to premiere Marvel 's Inhumans in IMAX theaters in September 2017 before airing on ABC during the 2017–18 television season ; a put pilot for another ABC series , Marvel 's Damage Control , has also been ordered , while an additional series focused on lesser - known female heroes is also in development .
Netflix 's Marvel series began in 2015 with Marvel 's Daredevil and Marvel 's Jessica Jones , followed by Marvel 's Luke Cage in 2016 .
Marvel 's Iron Fist , the crossover miniseries
Marvel 's The Defenders , and Marvel 's The Punisher released in 2017 .
Additionally , the MCU expanded to Hulu with Marvel 's Runaways in 2017 , and to Freeform with Marvel 's Cloak & Dagger in 2018 .
Marvel 's New Warriors is also scheduled to air in 2018 but does not have a broadcaster .
The first of the Marvel Studios series for Disney+ will center on Loki .
Starring in the series are Clark Gregg as Phil Coulson in Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. and Hayley Atwell as Peggy Carter in Agent Carter , both reprising their roles from MCU films , while Anson Mount headlines Inhumans as Black Bolt .
Daredevil introduces Charlie Cox in the title role of Matt Murdock / Daredevil as well as Jon Bernthal as the Punisher in its second season , who reprises his role as the star of The Punisher .
Jessica Jones introduces Krysten Ritter as Jessica Jones and Mike Colter as Luke Cage , with the latter also headlining Luke Cage .
Finn Jones stars as Danny Rand / Iron Fist in Iron Fist , and joins Cox , Ritter , and Colter for The Defenders .
The Runaways cast consists of the titular group , including Rhenzy Feliz as Alex Wilder , and their parents , including Ryan Sands as Geoffrey Wilder .
Olivia Holt and Aubrey Joseph star in Cloak & Dagger as Tandy Bowen / Dagger and Tyrone Johnson / Cloak , respectively , while Milana Vayntrub and Derek Theler lead New Warriors as Doreen Green / Squirrel Girl and Craig Hollis / Mister Immortal , respectively .
Tom Hiddleston will reprise his role as Loki for the Disney+ series .
ABC SERIES
Section::::ABC series . ! scope="col " Series ! scope="col " colspan="2 " Season ! scope="col " Episodes ! scope="col " First aired ! scope="col "
Last aired ! scope="col " Showrunner(s ) !
scope="col " Status !
scope="row " rowspan="7 " Marvel 's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.Marvel 's Agent CarterMarvel 's Inhumans
MARVEL 'S AGENTS OF S.H.I.E.L.D. ( 2013 – )
Section::::Marvel 's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. ( 2013 – ) .
Agent Phil Coulson assembles a small team of S.H.I.E.L.D. ( Strategic Homeland Intervention , Enforcement and Logistics Division ) agents to handle strange new cases .
After discovering that Project Centipede and their leader , " The Clairvoyant " , were affiliated with Hydra , a terrorist organization , Coulson and his team must deal with Hydra members still at large following , while also looking to restore trust from the government and public .
In the wake of S.H.I.E.L.D. 's wars with Hydra and the Inhumans , a race of superhumans , Coulson begins a secret mission to protect the world from new threats .
After the defeat of the Inhuman Hive and with Hydra destroyed , S.H.I.E.L.D. is made a legitimate organization once again , with Coulson returning to being a field agent , and is tasked with tracking down more enhanced people – including Robbie Reyes / Ghost Rider – while Agent Leo Fitz and Dr. Holden Radcliffe complete their work on Life Model Decoys .
Coulson and members of his team are eventually abducted to the future in deep space , where they must try and save humanity while figuring out how to get home .
In August 2012 , ABC ordered a pilot for a show called S.H.I.E.L.D. , to be written by Joss Whedon , Jed Whedon , and Maurissa Tancharoen , and directed by Joss Whedon .
On April 6 , 2013 , ABC announced that the show would be titled Marvel 's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , and it was officially ordered to series on May 10 , 2013 .
Jed Whedon , Tancharoen and Jeffrey Bell act as the series ' showrunners , while Clark Gregg reprises his role from the films as Phil Coulson .
The series was renewed for a second season on May 8 , 2014 , a third on May 7 , 2015 , a fourth on March 3 , 2016 , and a fifth on May 11 , 2017 , a sixth on May 14 , 2018 , and a seventh season on November 16 , 2018 ; the sixth and seventh seasons both consist of 13 episodes .
The first season , which premiered on September 24 , 2013 , aired episodes that directly relate to events in the films and Captain America : The Winter Soldier .
The revelation in Captain America : The Winter Soldier that S.H.I.E.L.D. had been infiltrated by Hydra had a huge impact on the series .
Regarding the synergy the show had with addressing events from the film , Loeb said , " It 's an extremely unique experience that does n't exist anywhere else out there in the entertainment business .
"
The second season , which premiered on September 23 , 2014 , introduces Inhumans to the MCU , ahead of their own television series .
Additionally , a recurring plot point in the first two seasons involved the body of a member of the Kree race , who play a significant role in Guardians of the Galaxy .
The third season , which premiered on September 29 , 2015 , introduces the concept of the Secret Warriors , with new Inhuman characters inspired by the comic of the same name , as well as Life Model Decoys .
The fourth season , which premiered on September 20 , 2016 , sees Robbie Reyes / Ghost Rider introduced to the MCU , and ties to the second season of Agent Carter and Doctor Strange .
The last four episodes of the fifth season , which premiered on December 1 , 2017 , coincides with the events of .
In the first season , Samuel L. Jackson , Cobie Smulders , Maximiliano Hernández , Titus Welliver and Jaimie Alexander all reprise their roles as Nick Fury , Maria Hill , Jasper Sitwell , Felix Blake , and Sif , respectively , from previous MCU films and One - Shots .
In the second season , Alexander and Smulders return , while Hayley Atwell , Neal McDonough , Kenneth Choi , and Henry Goodman also reprise their roles as Peggy Carter , Timothy " Dum Dum " Dugan , Jim Morita , and List , respectively , from previous MCU films .
In the third season , William Sadler reprises his role as Matthew Ellis from the MCU films , and Powers Boothe recurs as his previously unnamed The Avengers character , Gideon Malick .
MARVEL 'S AGENT CARTER ( 2015–16 )
Section::::Marvel 's Agent Carter ( 2015–16 ) .
In 1946 , Peggy Carter must balance the routine office work she does for the Strategic Scientific Reserve while secretly assisting Howard Stark , who finds himself framed for supplying deadly weapons to enemies of the United States .
Carter is assisted by Stark 's butler , Edwin Jarvis , to find those responsible and dispose of the weapons .
Carter eventually moves from New York City to Los Angeles to deal with the threats of the new atomic age in the wake of World War II , gaining new friends , a new home and potential new love .
By September 2013 , Marvel was developing a series inspired by the Agent Carter One - Shot , featuring Peggy Carter , and in January 2014 , the series was confirmed to be in development , with the script for a potential pilot to be written by and writers Christopher Markus & Stephen McFeely .
On May 8 , 2014 , ABC officially ordered Marvel 's Agent Carter to series .
Tara Butters , Michele Fazekas and Chris Dingess act as showrunners on the series , while Hayley Atwell reprises her role from the films as Peggy Carter .
The series was renewed for a second season on May 7 , 2015 , and was officially canceled by ABC on May 12 , 2016 .
The first season , which premiered on January 6 , 2015 , introduces the origins of the Black Widow and Winter Soldier programs , which both appear in several MCU films .
The second season , which premiered on January 19 , 2016 , features the Darkforce , which ties to the character Marcus Daniels in Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. and Doctor Strange .
In the first season , Dominic Cooper reprise his role of Howard Stark from Captain America : The First Avenger .
James D'Arcy portrays Edwin Jarvis , Stark 's butler in the series who eventually serves as inspiration for Tony Stark 's artificial intelligence J.A.R.V.I.S. Costa Ronin portrays a young Anton Vanko , the co - creator of the arc reactor with Stark .
Chris Evans appears as Steve Rogers / Captain America via archive footage from The First Avenger .
McDonough and Toby Jones reprise their roles as Dugan and Arnim Zola , respectively .
In the second season , Cooper returns to reprise his role .
MARVEL 'S INHUMANS ( 2017 )
Section::::Marvel 's Inhumans ( 2017 ) .
After a military coup , the Inhuman Royal Family , led by Black Bolt , escape to Hawaii where they must save themselves and the world .
In November 2016 , Marvel Television and IMAX Corporation announced Marvel 's Inhumans , to be produced in conjunction with ABC Studios .
The series ' first two episodes were filmed entirely on IMAX digital cameras , and premiered on IMAX screens on September 1 , 2017 , for two weeks .
ABC then broadcast the series weekly starting with the first two episodes on September 29 , 2017 , with the network airing of the first two episodes featuring exclusive content , outside of the versions screened on IMAX .
Select action sequences in the rest of the series were also shot on IMAX .
The series was neither intended to be a reworking of the planned film from Marvel Studios , nor a spin - off from Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Ben Sherwood , president of Disney – ABC Television Group , added that " We 've worked very carefully with our friends at Marvel Studios — and this is a critical point — to make sure that calendar - wise and content - wise we are only enhancing " the MCU ; the theatrical debut of the series was timed to not interfere with the release of any Marvel Studios films .
In December 2016 , Scott Buck was announced as showrunner and executive producer for the series .
In February 2017 , Anson Mount was cast as Black Bolt .
Filming began in March 2017 in Hawaii , and concluded in June .
ABC officially canceled the series on May 11 , 2018 .
NETFLIX SERIES Section::::Netflix series . ! scope="col "
Series ! scope="col " colspan="2 " Season ! scope="col " Episodes ! scope="col " Originally released ! scope="col " Showrunner(s ) ! scope="col " Status !
scope="row
" rowspan="3 " Marvel 's Daredevil colspan="2 " colspan="2"Marvel 's Jessica Jones colspan="2"Marvel 's Luke Cage colspan="2"Marvel 's Iron FistMarvel 's The DefendersMarvel 's The Punisher
By October 2013 , Marvel was preparing four drama series and a miniseries to present to video on demand services and cable providers , with Netflix , Amazon , and WGN America expressing interest .
That November , it was announced that Disney would provide Netflix with live - action series based on Daredevil , Jessica Jones , Iron Fist , and Luke Cage , leading up to a miniseries based on the Defenders .
MARVEL 'S DAREDEVIL ( 2015–18 )
Section::::Marvel 's Daredevil ( 2015–18 ) .
Lawyer - by - day
Matt Murdock uses his heightened senses from being blinded as a young boy to fight crime at night on the streets of Hell 's Kitchen as Daredevil , juxtaposed with the rise of crime lord Wilson Fisk .
Murdock eventually crosses paths with Frank Castle / Punisher , a vigilante with far deadlier methods , and sees the return of his old girlfriend , Elektra Natchios .
When Wilson Fisk is released from prison , Murdock must decide between hiding from the world or embracing his life as a hero vigilante .
In December 2013 , Marvel confirmed that Drew Goddard would be the executive producer and showrunner for Daredevil , and would write and direct the first episode , though at the end of May 2014 , it was announced that Goddard would no longer be the showrunner for the series , being replaced by Steven S. DeKnight .
Goddard , who wrote the first two episodes , remained with the show as an executive producer .
It was also revealed that the series would be titled Marvel 's Daredevil .
A few days later , Charlie Cox was cast as Daredevil .
A second season was ordered on April 21 , 2015 , with Doug Petrie and Marco Ramirez taking over as showrunners from DeKnight , who could not return to the series due to a prior commitment .
A third season was ordered in July 2016 , with Erik Oleson announced as the new showrunner of the series in October 2017 .
Netflix canceled the series on November 29 , 2018 .
The first season , which debuted in its entirety on April 10 , 2015 , features references to The Avengers and the Battle of New York , as well as mentioning Carl " Crusher " Creel , who appears on Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.
The insignia for the Iron Fist antagonist Steel Serpent is also seen in the season .
The second season , which premiered on March 18 , 2016 , features the motorcycle gang Dogs of Hell , who appeared on Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , along with numerous references to the events of the first season of Jessica Jones .
The third season was released on October 19 , 2018 .
In the second season , Jon Bernthal was cast in a leading role as Frank Castle / Punisher , before headlining his own series , while Michelle Hurd and Carrie - Anne Moss reprise their roles of Samantha Reyes and Jeri Hogarth from Jessica Jones .
MARVEL 'S JESSICA JONES ( 2015 – )
Section::::Marvel 's Jessica Jones ( 2015 – ) .
Former superhero Jessica Jones suffers from post - traumatic stress disorder , so she opens her own detective agency to help people .
She begins to put her life back together after her encounter with Kilgrave , taking on a new case that makes her reluctantly confront her past .
In November 2013 , Melissa Rosenberg was announced as the writer and executive producer of the series , and the following March , Loeb stated that filming would begin after Daredevil .
In December 2014 , Krysten Ritter was cast as Jessica Jones in the series , officially titled Marvel 's Jessica Jones .
A second season was ordered on January 17 , 2016 , and a third on April 12 , 2018 .
The first season , which debuted in its entirety on November 20 , 2015 , features references to the events and characters of The Avengers .
In the first season , Mike Colter was cast as Luke Cage , a recurring role in the series before headlining his own series .
Rosario Dawson reprises her Daredevil role of Claire Temple , as does Royce Johnson in his role of Brett Mahoney .
The second season , which was released on March 8 , 2018 , sees Elden Henson reprise his role of Franklin " Foggy " Nelson , as well as Rob Morgan as Turk Barrett and Tijuana Ricks as Thembi Wallace .
The third season is scheduled to be released in 2019 .
MARVEL 'S LUKE CAGE ( 2016–18 )
Section::::Marvel 's Luke Cage ( 2016–18 ) .
When a sabotaged experiment gives him super strength and unbreakable skin , Luke Cage becomes a fugitive attempting to rebuild his life in Harlem , and must soon confront his past and fight a battle for the heart of his city .
After clearing his name , Cage becomes a hero and celebrity in Harlem , only to encounter a new threat that makes him confront the line between hero and villain .
Colter reprises his role as Carl Lucas / Luke Cage in his own series , titled Marvel 's Luke Cage .
In March 2014 , Loeb stated that the series would begin filming after Iron Fist , being the fourth of the individual series .
By March 2015 , it was instead slated to be the third of the individual series , beginning production after Jessica Jones .
The series was switched with Iron Fist after the positive reception Luke Cage received on Jessica Jones , becoming that series ' breakout star and Marvel wanting to " follow the momentum " .
Also in March , Cheo Hodari Coker was announced as showrunner and executive producer of the series .
A second season was ordered on December 3 , 2016 .
Netflix canceled the series on October 19 , 2018 .
The first season , which premiered on September 30 , 2016 , features references to The Avengers , the second season of Daredevil , the first season of Jessica Jones , and a flier for Colleen Wing 's martial arts class , and mentions Justin Hammer , Wilson Fisk and Frank Castle .
Dawson , Morgan , Rachel Taylor , Stephen Rider , Parisa Fitz - Henley , and Danny Johnson reprise their roles as Claire Temple , Turk Barrett , Trish Walker , Blake Tower , Reva Connors and Ben Donovan in the series , respectively .
The second season , which premiered on June 22 , 2018 , features a reference to Detective Brigid O'Reilly recently moving from Harlem to New Orleans , in reference to that character 's role in the series Cloak & Dagger .
Finn Jones , Jessica Henwick , and Henson reprise their roles as Danny Rand , Colleen Wing , and Foggy Nelson in the season .
MARVEL 'S IRON FIST ( 2017–18 )
Section::::Marvel 's Iron Fist ( 2017–18 ) .
Danny Rand returns to New York City , after being missing for fifteen years , to reclaim his family company .
However , when a threat emerges , Rand must choose between his family 's legacy and his duties as the Iron Fist .
In March 2014 , Loeb initially stated that the series would begin filming after Jessica Jones as the third of the individual series .
By March 2015 , it was expected to be the fourth of the individual series , entering production following Luke Cage .
The series was switched with Luke Cage after the positive reception Luke Cage received on Jessica Jones , becoming that series ' breakout star and Marvel wanting to " follow the momentum " .
In April 2015 , the title of the series was revealed to be Marvel 's Iron Fist .
In December 2015 , Marvel announced that Scott Buck would serve as showrunner and executive producer of the series .
In February 2016 , Finn Jones was cast as Rand .
A second season was revealed to be in development in July 2017 , with Raven Metzner announced as the new showrunner for the season , replacing Buck .
Netflix canceled the series on October 12 , 2018 .
The first season , which premiered on March 17 , 2017 , makes references to the events of The Avengers , the Hulk , Stark Industries , Jessica Jones , Daredevil , Luke Cage , and Seagate Prison , and mentions the Dogs of Hell biker gang , New York Bulletin editor - in - chief Mitchell Ellison and reporter Karen Page , Roxxon Oil and Midland Circle .
Events from the second season of Daredevil are also noted throughout .
Moss , Dawson , Wai Ching Ho , Marquis Rodriguez , Tijuana Ricks , and Suzanne H. Smart reprise their roles as Jeri Hogarth , Claire Temple , Gao , Darryl , Thembi Wallace , and Shirley Benson , respectively , in the series .
The second season , which was released on September 7 , 2018 , sees Simone Missick reprise her role as Misty Knight .
MARVEL 'S THE DEFENDERS ( 2017 )
Section::::Marvel 's The Defenders ( 2017 ) .
The superheroes Daredevil , Jessica Jones , Luke Cage , and Iron Fist team - up in New York City .
The Defenders sees Cox , Ritter , Colter , and Jones reprise their roles as Matt Murdock / Daredevil , Jessica Jones , Luke Cage , and Danny Rand / Iron Fist , respectively , from the previous television series .
In March 2014 , Loeb stated that the miniseries , officially titled Marvel 's The Defenders , would begin filming after Iron Fist .
In April 2016 , Marvel announced that Douglas Petrie and Marco Ramirez would act as showrunners for The Defenders .
However , by the start of filming in New York City in October 2016 , Petrie had left the series as co - showrunner .
Filming concluded in March 2017 .
The eight - episode event premiered on August 18 , 2017 .
The miniseries also sees many supporting characters from the individual series reprise their roles , including , Deborah Ann Woll , Henson , Scott Glenn , Élodie Yung , Eka Darville , Moss , Taylor , Simone Missick , Jessica Henwick , Dawson , Ho , Ramón Rodríguez , Peter McRobbie , Morgan , Amy Rutberg , Susan Varon , and Nichole Yannetty as Karen Page , Foggy Nelson , Stick , Elektra Natchios , Malcolm Ducasse , Jeri Hogarth , Trish Walker , Misty Knight , Colleen Wing , Claire Temple , Gao , Bakuto , Lantom , Turk Barrett , Marci Stahl , Josie and Nicole , respectively .
Midland Circle , which was referenced in previous Netflix series , is revealed to be an operation of the Hand , who bought the building to search for the life substance hidden beneath the property .
The miniseries also references the events of The Avengers .
MARVEL 'S THE PUNISHER ( 2017 – )
Section::::Marvel 's The Punisher ( 2017 – ) .
Frank Castle is haunted and hunted after the murder of his family and becomes a vigilante known in the criminal underworld as " the Punisher " , who aims to fight crime by any means necessary .
By January 2016 , ahead of the debut of Bernthal as armed vigilante Frank Castle / Punisher in the second season of Daredevil , Netflix was in " very early development " on a spin - off series titled The Punisher , and was looking for a showrunner .
The series would be centered on Bernthal as Castle , and was described as a stand - alone series , outside of the series leading up to The Defenders .
Loeb implied that Marvel Television had not instigated the development of the spin - off and were focusing on making " the best 13 episodes of Daredevil season two " at the time , but did say , " I 'm never going to discourage a network from looking at one of our characters and encouraging us to do more ...
If we are lucky enough that through the writing , through the direction , through the actor that people want to see more of that person , terrific .
"
In April 2016 , Marvel and Netflix ordered The Punisher , along with confirming Bernthal 's involvement and naming Steve Lightfoot as showrunner .
Filming began in Brooklyn , New York in October 2016 , and concluded in April 2017 .
A second season was ordered on December 12 , 2017 .
In the first season , which was released on November 17 , 2017 , Woll and Morgan reprise their roles as Karen Page and Turk Barrett , respectively .
The second season is expected to be released in January 2019 .
HULU SERIES Section::::Hulu series . ! scope="col " Series ! scope="col " colspan="2 " Season ! scope="col " Episodes ! scope="col " First released ! scope="col " Last released ! scope="col " Showrunner(s ) !
scope="col " Status ! scope="row " rowspan="2 " Marvel 's Runaways MARVEL 'S RUNAWAYS ( 2017 – )
Section::::Marvel 's Runaways ( 2017 – ) .
When six teenagers discover their parents are villains , they reluctantly unite to go against them .
In the second season , the teenagers are now on the run from their parents , living on their own and figuring out how to stop Pride , before learning there may be a mole among them .
In August 2016 , Marvel announced Marvel 's Runaways had received a pilot order , along with additional scripts , from the streaming service Hulu , based on the team of the same name .
The pilot is written by Josh Schwartz and Stephanie Savage , who also serve as executive producers and showrunners of the series .
In February 2017 , Marvel announced the cast of the Runaways , with Rhenzy Feliz as Alex Wilder , Lyrica Okano as Nico Minoru , Virginia Gardner as Karolina Dean , Ariela Barer as Gert Yorkes , Gregg Sulkin as Chase Stein , and Allegra Acosta as Molly Hernandez .
Shortly after , they announced the cast of the Pride , the parents of the Runaways , with Ryan Sands as Geoffrey Wilder , Angel Parker as Catherine Wilder , Brittany Ishibashi as Tina Minoru , James Yaegashi as Robert Minoru , Kevin Weisman as Dale Yorkes , Brigid Brannagh as Stacey Yorkes , Annie Wersching as Leslie Dean , Kip Pardue as Frank Dean , James Marsters as Victor Stein , and Ever Carradine as Janet Stein .
Hulu ordered the series in May 2017 .
Filming began in Los Angeles in February 2017 , and concluded in October 2017 .
The first season , consisting of 10 episodes , premiered on November 21 , 2017 .
Hulu renewed the series for a second season on January 8 , 2018 , which is scheduled to release all episodes on December 21 , 2018 .
A different version of Tina Minoru previously appeared in Doctor Strange , in a minor role as a Master of the Mystic Arts portrayed by Linda Louise Duan .
FREEFORM SERIES
Section::::Freeform series .
! scope="col " Series ! scope="col " colspan="2 " Season ! scope="col " Episodes ! scope="col " First aired ! scope="col "
Last aired ! scope="col " Showrunner(s ) !
scope="col " Status ! scope="row " rowspan="2 " Marvel 's Cloak & Dagger
MARVEL 'S CLOAK & DAGGER ( 2018 – )
Section::::Marvel 's Cloak & Dagger ( 2018 – ) . Tandy Bowen and Tyrone Johnson , two teenagers from different backgrounds , acquire superpowers while forming a romantic relationship .
They soon realize that their powers work better when they are together , " but their feelings for each other make their already complicated world even more challenging . "
In April 2016 , the ABC - owned network Freeform announced a straight - to - series order for Marvel 's Cloak & Dagger , based on the characters of the same name , calling it their " first venture into the Marvel Cinematic Universe " , and describing the show as a " superhero love story " .
In January 2017 , Olivia Holt and Aubrey Joseph were cast as Tandy Bowen / Dagger and Tyrone Johnson / Cloak , respectively .
Joe Pokaski serves as showrunner for the series .
Filming for the series occurs in New Orleans .
A second season was ordered on July 20 , 2018 .
The first season , which premiered on June 7 , 2018 , sees Roxxon Oil featured , along with the Darkforce , which fuels Cloak 's powers and was previously established in Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. and Agent Carter .
The season also makes direct references to the setting and characters of Luke Cage .
The second season is scheduled to premiere in 2019 .
DISNEY+ SERIES Section::::Disney+ series . ! scope="col " Series ! scope="col " colspan="2 " Season ! scope="col " Episodes ! scope="col " First aired ! scope="col "
Last aired ! scope="col " Showrunner(s ) !
scope="col " Status ! scope="row
" Untitled Loki series
By November 2017 , Disney was developing a Marvel series specifically for release on its new streaming service Disney+ , which it planned to launch before the end of 2019 .
In September 2018 , it was reported that Marvel Studios was developing several limited series for the service , to be centered on " second tier " characters from the MCU films who had not and were unlikely to star in their own films ; the actors who portrayed the characters in the films were expected to reprise their roles for the limited series .
Stories for each series were still being decided on , but the series were expected to be six to eight episodes each and have a " hefty [ budget ] rivaling those of a major studio production " .
The series would be produced by Marvel Studios rather than Marvel Television , with Marvel Studios President Kevin Feige taking a " hands - on role " in each series ' development , focusing on " continuity of story " with the films and " handling " the actors who would be reprising their roles from the films .
UNTITLED LOKI SERIES Section::::Untitled Loki series .
With the September 2018 report of the limited series , one was expected to star Tom Hiddleston 's Loki .
Disney CEO Bob Iger confirmed in November that the series was in development and that Hiddleston was expected to reprise his role .
POTENTIAL SERIES Section::::Potential series .
The following are potential series : * Scarlet Witch :
With the September 2018 report of the limited series , one was expected to star Elizabeth Olsen 's Wanda Maximoff / Scarlet Witch .
By the end of October , Paul Bettany 's Vision was expected to play a large role in the Scarlet Witch series , which would focus on their relationship .
* Falcon / Winter Soldier : At the end of October 2018 , Malcolm Spellman was hired to write a limited series that would focus on Anthony Mackie 's Sam Wilson / Falcon and Sebastian Stan 's Bucky Barnes / Winter Soldier .
Mackie and Stan had both previously expressed interest in starring in an MCU spin - off film together , with Stan comparing the potential idea to buddy comedy films like Midnight Run ( 1988 ) and 48 Hrs .
( 1982 ) .
OTHER SERIES
Section::::Other series . ! scope="col " Series ! scope="col " colspan="2 " Season ! scope="col " Episodes ! scope="col " First aired
! scope="col " Last aired ! scope="col " Showrunner(s ) !
scope="col " Status ! scope="row " Marvel 's New Warriors MARVEL 'S
NEW WARRIORS
Section::::Marvel 's New Warriors .
Doreen Green / Squirrel Girl , Craig Hollis / Mister Immortal , Dwayne Taylor / Night Thrasher , Robbie Baldwin / Speedball , Zach Smith / Microbe , and Deborah Fields / Debrii , are superpowered young people with abilities very different from the Avengers , who want to make a positive impact in the world even if they are not quite ready to be heroes .
By the end of August 2016 , Marvel Television and ABC Studios were developing a half - hour comedy series based on the New Warriors featuring Squirrel Girl , with the series being offered to cable networks and streaming outlets .
In April 2017 , Freeform announced a straight - to - series order for Marvel 's New Warriors , with Kevin Biegel serving as the series ' showrunner and writing the first script .
In July 2017 , the cast was revealed with Milana Vayntrub starring as Doreen Green / Squirrel Girl and Derek Theler as Craig Hollis / Mister Immortal .
In November 2017 , it was announced that the series would no longer air on Freeform and was being shopped to other networks , with Marvel intent on airing the series in 2018 .
The first season , consisting of 10 episodes , is set to air in 2018 , with Biegel serving as showrunner for the series .
RECURRING CAST AND CHARACTERS ABC SERIES
Section::::Recurring cast and characters .
Section::::ABC series .
List indicator(s )
* This table includes recurring , main characters , who have appeared in at least two seasons and as a member of the principal ( " main " ) cast for at least one of those .
Please see the for more information .
* Series seasons , within the network season , are ordered based on their premiere date .
* A dark grey cell indicates the character was not in the season , or that the character 's presence in the season has not yet been announced .
*
An indicates the actor had or will have a recurring role for the season .
*
A indicates the actor made or will make a guest appearance in the season .
2013–14 season ! scope="col " colspan="2 " 2014–15 season ! scope="col " colspan="2 " 2015–16 season ! scope="col " 2016–17 season ! scope="col " 2017–18 season ! scope="col " width="12 % " Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. ! scope="col " width="12 % " Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. ! scope="col " width="12 % " Agent Carter ! scope="col " width="12 % " Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. ! scope="col " width="12 % " Agent Carter ! scope="col " width="12 % " Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. ! scope="col " width="12 % " Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. !
scope="row "
Lincoln Campbell ! scope="row " Peggy Carter !
scope="row "
Phil Coulson !
scope="row "
Leo Fitz ! scope="row " Lance Hunter ! scope="row " Edwin Jarvis ! scope="row " Daisy " Skye " Johnson !
scope="row
" Alphonso " Mack " MacKenzie ! scope="row " Melinda May ! scope="row " Bobbi Morse ! scope="row " Holden Radcliffe !
scope="row " Elena " Yo - Yo " Rodriguez ! scope="row " Jemma Simmons ! scope="row " Daniel Sousa ! scope="row " Jack Thompson ! scope="row " Grant Ward NETFLIX SERIES Section::::Netflix series .
List indicator(s )
* This table includes recurring , main characters , who have appeared in at least two series as a member of the principal ( " main " ) cast for at least one of those .
Please see the for more information .
* A dark grey cell indicates the character was not in the series , or that the character 's presence in the series has not yet been announced .
*
An indicates the actor had or will have a recurring role in the series .
*
A indicates the actor made or will make a guest appearance in the series .
Daredevil !
scope="col " width="14 % " Jessica Jones ! scope="col " width="14 % " Luke Cage !
scope="col " width="14 % "
Iron Fist ! scope="col " width="14 % " The Defenders ! scope="col " width="14 % " The Punisher ! scope="row " Bakuto ! scope="row " Luke Cage !
scope="row " Frank Castle !
scope="row " Malcolm Ducasse !
scope="row "
Jeri Hogarth !
scope="row " Jessica Jones ! scope="row " Mercedes " Misty " Knight !
scope="row "
Matt Murdock ! scope="row " Elektra Natchios ! scope="row " Franklin " Foggy " Nelson !
scope="row " Karen Page !
scope="row " Danny Rand ! scope="row " Stick !
scope="row " Claire Temple ! scope="row " Blake Tower !
scope="row " Patricia " Trish " Walker ! scope="row " Colleen Wing RECEPTION RATINGS
Nielsen ratingsDVR CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
!
scope="col " Series ! scope="col " colspan="2 " class="unsortable " Season ! scope="col " data - sort - type="number " Rotten Tomatoes ! scope="col " data - sort - type="number " MetacriticVariety felt the Netflix series " have already leapfrogged ABC 's forays into the Marvel universe in terms of their appeal , in part by tapping into the avid fan base that supports pay models and does n't need to be spoon - fed plot points .
In the process , they have demonstrated that it 's possible to deliver a credible superhero show without a lot of pyrotechnics " .
After the release of the first season of Luke Cage , The Atlantics David Sims wrote on the pacing issue of Marvel 's Netflix series , a common complaint to that point , stating , " After two seasons of Daredevil , one of Jessica Jones , and now one of Luke Cage , the Netflix model feels fundamentally flawed , encouraging the kind of molasses - slow plotting comic books are designed to eschew .
The problem is n't that these shows are bad , necessarily ...
But they all take far too long to get going , by which point many viewers will have already tuned out . "
He felt one of the problems was the fact that Netflix does not rely on viewers tuning into a particular series as broadcast series do each week , but rather subscribers who , if they lose interest , " can take as long as they want to catch up ... as long as they keep paying their subscription fee every month . "
The Netflix series are also afforded the opportunity to explore elements in more detail , with Sims noting " A lot of this detail [ is ] good , but it could have been considerably compressed — none of the Marvel Netflix series , so far , would have lost much by being squeezed into 10 episodes , or even 8 .
If Netflix shaved the 60-minute running time down quite a bit , it would likely inspire more economical — and better — storytelling from its shows .
"
Sims concluded by saying , " What 's most frustrating of all is that Netflix is n't getting rid of this approach anytime soon .
Daredevil season three , Jessica Jones season two , Iron Fist , and The Punisher are all on their way , and each will follow the same 13-episode structure ...
The only respite may come in the form of The Defenders , a planned crossover series ... over the course of just eight episodes .
Who knows ?
The show might even surprise viewers and explain its villain 's motivations within the first hour .
Until then , fans will be stuck needlessly giving over entire days to these series , while others are deterred from watching at all . "
In her review for the first season of Iron Fist , Allison Keene of Collider spoke more on the pacing of Marvel 's Netflix series , stating , "
By focusing so intently on making these series ... much more grounded in a gritty real world than what we typically expect from a superhero show ( like DC 's candy - colored [ Arrowverse ] on The CW ) , the problem is that they miss out on the key element : this be fantastical entertainment . "
With The Defenders , Jeff Jansen of Entertainment Weekly felt many improvements were made to the general complaints the previous seasons received .
He said , " The Defenders is far from perfect .
But it 's an enjoyable superhero adventure distinguished by improvements and innovations that I hope Marvel will carry forward .
Shorter seasons .
More team - ups .
Fewer shows .
Start the consolidation by letting go of Iron Fist .
If Danny Rand must persist , add him to the other shows and let the stronger players carry him . "
POTENTIAL PROJECTS
MARVEL 'S
DAMAGE CONTROL Section::::Potential projects .
Section::::Marvel 's Damage Control .
The show follows the overworked , underpaid , clean up crew of the Marvel Cinematic Universe , who specialize in dealing with the aftermath of superhero conflicts , rescheduling events because of the conflicts , and retrieving lost items .
In October 2015 , ABC ordered a put pilot for a half - hour live - action comedy series Marvel 's Damage Control , based on the comics construction company of the same name .
The series is being developed by Ben Karlin for ABC Studios and Marvel Television , with Karlin also writing the script for the project and serving as executive producer .
The series had previously been implied by then ABC Entertainment president Paul Lee to have begun airing as early as the 2016–17 television season .
UNTITLED JOHN RIDLEY - WRITTEN SERIES
Section::::Untitled John Ridley - written series .
Marvel has been working with screenwriter John Ridley since mid - April 2015 to craft a new television series , " reinventing " an existing Marvel character or property .
In January 2016 , Ridley confirmed that the project was " still in development " .
He stated that he was looking to " bring some of the socially conscious nature " of Jessica Jones and his series American Crime to the show , while also creating something that is " straight entertainment " .
A year later , Channing Dungey revealed that Ridley 's project was still progressing , with Ridley working on a rewrite of his script .
Ridley added that the rewrite was not because " anything did n't work the first time around " , but rather trying to make sure the series does something viewers have not necessarily seen before in a superhero television series , hoping it would occupy " a space that is not currently being filled " by Marvel .
He also stated that he hoped to create the series " in the near term . "
By August 2017 , Dungey was " not sure " if Ridley was still working on the project .
UNTITLED ALLAN HEINBERG - WRITTEN SERIES
Section::::Untitled Allan Heinberg - written series .
Dungey said in May 2016 that there were " a handful of projects in development " , after passing on Most Wanted and canceling Agent Carter , and that Marvel and ABC were looking " at series that would be beneficial to both brands . "
In January 2018 , she noted that Marvel and ABC " tried a few things that have n't worked out as well as we would 've liked .
We developed a couple things this season that we do n't think are going to end up going forward , so we 're going to look really carefully about what we do next , because the idea for us is to come up with something that works very well for both Marvel and ABC , so we 're going to continue to try there . "
In August , Dungey said " we 're cooking up a couple things for broadcast " in terms of potential new Marvel series on ABC , and that there was one idea in particular that she was excited to talk about .
In September 2018 , ABC gave a production commitment to a series featuring lesser - known female superheroes , written and executive produced by Allan Heinberg .
Jeph Loeb was also set to executive produce the potential series .
The idea had been a " strong contender from the get - go " in terms of the new series that Marvel and ABC had been developing .
OTHER Section::::Other .
In January 2016 , Lee announced that ABC Studios was developing a second comedy series with Marvel after Damage Control in hope it would air on ABC , while Netflix CCO Ted Sarandos stated that " all the characters in the universe could also spin out " into their own series at some point .
Netflix vice president of original content Cindy Holland reiterated in July 2018 that there were always ongoing discussions regarding creating more spin - offs for characters in their Marvel series .
That September , Loeb said that if he was able to , he would create a Daughters of the Dragon series for Netflix featuring Jessica Henwick 's Colleen Wing and Simone Missick 's Misty Knight .
ABANDONED PROJECTS Section::::Abandoned projects .
By April 2015 , Marvel was developing a spinoff series of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.
The series , which was being developed by Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. executive producer Jeffrey Bell and writer Paul Zbyszewski , would be based on storylines occurring at the end of the second season of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , and would receive its own pilot rather than a backdoor pilot .
Adrianne Palicki and Nick Blood entered into discussions to headline the potential new series as their characters Bobbi Morse and Lance Hunter , respectively .
By May 7 , 2015 , when ABC announced their series renewals and cancellations , and new series pickups , the Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. spinoff was passed on .
In August 2015 , the Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. spinoff series received new life as a reworked series , titled Marvel 's Most Wanted , with a pilot order .
Bell and Zbyszewski once again developed the series , while also serving as co - writers of the pilot , executive producers , and showrunners , with Jeph Loeb also attached as executive producer .
The series would still focus on Morse and Hunter , with Palicki and Blood both attached , and was described as " a new take focusing on the same duo and their continuing adventures . "
In May 2016 , the series was passed on by ABC once again .
SEE ALSO
* List of television series based on Marvel Comics REFERENCES