Z NATION Z Nation is an American action / horror / comedy - drama / post - apocalyptic television series that airs on Syfy , created by Karl Schaefer and Craig Engler , and produced by The Asylum .
The first season of 13 episodes premiered on September 12 , 2014 .
Z Nation is filmed in the Spokane , Washington area .
On June 16 , 2016 , Syfy announced that Z Nation third season would be preceded by a TV movie , set prior to the climax of season 2 and introducing central characters for the third season .
However , the movie was instead presented as the first two episodes of the season , the two - part " No Mercy " .
On December 15 , 2017 , Syfy renewed the series for a fifth season , which premiered on October 5 , 2018 .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
Z Nation begins three years into a zombie apocalypse caused by a virus that has already killed most humans .
In the days just before society fell apart , Murphy was one of three inmates at Portsmouth Naval Prison in Kittery , Maine , who were unwilling participants in a government - approved experiment .
Each inmate was given a different test vaccine .
Murphy was the only one to survive the vaccine injection .
He is the only known survivor of a zombie bite who did not turn into a zombie , and his blood contains antibodies that are mankind 's last and best hope for a vaccine .
However , he seems to be mutating into some form of hybrid between zombie and human — his skin is shedding and his body turning blue , and he seems to be able to control and even mesmerize certain types of zombies he encounters .
Yet he has not turned into a full zombie and still maintains control of himself .
The series revolves around his travels with a small group of survivors being led through the apocalypse by Simon " Citizen Z " Cruller , who watches the world from his multiple computers .
The group is looking to use him to solve the zombie pandemic .
The group must transport Murphy from New York to the world 's last known functioning Centers for Disease Control research lab in California .
However , Murphy harbors a dark secret about his condition that threatens them all .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN CAST
* Kellita Smith as Roberta Warren * DJ Qualls as Citizen Z
* Michael Welch as Mack Thompson ( seasons 1–2 )
* Keith Allan as Alvin Murphy
* Anastasia Baranova as Addy Carver * Russell Hodgkinson as Steven " Doc " Beck * Pisay Pao as Cassandra ( seasons 1–2 , guest season 3 )
* Nat Zang as Thomas " 10 K " * Tom Everett Scott as Charles Garnett ( season 1 )
* Harold Perrineau as Mark Hammond ( season 1 ) * Matt Cedeño as Javier Vasquez ( seasons 2 , guest season 3 )
* Emilio Rivera as Escorpion ( seasons 2–3 )
* Tara Holt as Lucy Murphy ( season 4 , guest seasons 2 - 3 )
* Joseph Gatt as The Man ( season 3 )
* Sydney Viengluang as Sun Mei ( season 3–present )
* Ramona Young as Kaya ( season 3–present )
* Natalie Jongjaroenlarp as Red ( season 3–present )
* Holden Goyette as " Nature Boy"/5
K ( season 3 , guest season 4 ) * Grace Phipps as Sgt .
Lilly Mueller ( seasons 4 - 5 )
* Henry Rollins as Lt . Mueller ( season 4 )
* Katy O'Brian as Georgia " George " St. Clair ( season 5 ) * Mario Van Peebles as Cooper ( season 5 ) * Lydia Hearst as Pandora ( season 5 )
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Z Nation is produced by Go2 Digital Media for The Asylum .
On June 29 , 2014 , it was announced that the filming of 13 episodes for the first season of the series was underway .
On October 12 , 2014 , Syfy announced that it had ordered a second season of Z Nation .
Schaefer and Engler have described Z Nation as an attempt to " put the fun back into zombies " , criticizing shows like The Walking Dead for being too serious .
Z Nations first season had a budget of less than $ 700,000 per episode .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The first season of Z Nation received mixed reviews from professional television critics .
Its aggregate score on Metacritic is 48/100 based on reviews from 11 critics .
Rotten Tomatoes gave the show a rating of 53 % , based on reviews from 17 critics , with the site 's consensus stating " although it 's hampered by an overcrowded narrative , Z Nation manages to muster up some fun scares without taking itself too seriously . "
Chris Carabott of IGN noted that the show " continues to set itself apart in campy and inventive ways . "
Brian Moylan of The Guardian called Z Nation scary " in the same vague way as that talking green blob is in the Mucinex commercials " and concluded that viewers would hate all the characters , but that " Citizen Z ( DJ Qualls ) is especially horrible . "
Merrill Barr of Forbes magazine said the show had a high entertainment value .
In its first season , Z Nation averaged 1.42 million viewers per episode , including a .48 rating in the 18- to 49-year - old demographic .
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
Z Nation is distributed internationally by Dynamic Television .
The series premiered on Syfy in Australia on April 1 , 2015 , and was watched by 26,000 viewers .
The United Kingdom premiere aired on Freeview channel Pick on July 21 , 2015 .
HOME RELEASE Section::::Home release .
Season 1 was released on DVD on February 10 , 2015 , by Syfy in association with Universal Home Entertainment .
It was also issued on iTunes , with episodes running approximately 41–43 minutes each .
The series is available on Netflix worldwide .
RELATED MEDIA SHARKNADO SERIES CROSSOVER AND REFERENCES Section::::Related media .
Section::::Sharknado series crossover and references .
The film , released in July 2015 , featured a cameo appearance by Smith as Sgt .
Warren .
In the first - season episode " Home Sweet Zombie " ( 2014 ) , upon viewing a tornado carrying and tossing zombies , Warren remarks , " They ai n't sharks ! "
The 2017 film featured a cameo appearance by Hodgkinson as Doc .
COMPANION PREQUEL SERIES Section::::Companion prequel series .
On July 19 , 2018 , it was reported that Netflix had given an eight - episode , straight - to - series order for Black Summer , a prequel series set within the Z Nation universe .
Actress Jaime King is set to star in the series , created by Karl Schaefer and John Hyams .
At the 2018 San Diego Comic - Con , Schaefer noted that " Black Summer is before the apocalypse got weird and was just scary . "
He also said that the drama series is not intended to be the funny version of The Walking Dead that Z Nation is , but instead will be a more traditional take on zombie lore .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS