RISE OF THE TOMB RAIDER Rise of the Tomb Raider is an action - adventure video game developed by Crystal Dynamics .
It is the sequel to the 2013 video game , Tomb Raider , and the eleventh entry in the Tomb Raider series .
The game was released by Microsoft Studios for Xbox One and Xbox 360 in 2015 .
Square Enix released the game for Microsoft Windows and PlayStation 4 in 2016 .
Its story follows Lara Croft as she ventures into Siberia in search of the legendary city of Kitezh while battling the paramilitary organization Trinity , which intends to uncover the city 's promise of immortality .
Lara must traverse the environment and combat enemies with firearms and stealth as she explores semi - open hubs .
In these hubs she can raid challenge tombs to unlock new rewards , complete side missions , and scavenge for resources which can be used to craft useful materials .
Development of Rise of the Tomb Raider closely followed the conclusion of development of the 2013 reboot .
Player feedback was considered during development , with the team reducing the number of quick time events and introducing more puzzles and challenge tombs .
The team traveled to several locations in Turkey , including Cappadocia , Istanbul and Ephesus , to design Kitezh .
Camilla Luddington returned to provide voice and motion - capture work for Lara .
Powered by the Foundation engine , the game was also developed by Eidos Montreal and Nixxes Software .
Rise of the Tomb Raider was announced at E3 2014 by Microsoft Studios .
It was revealed as a timed exclusive for Microsoft at Gamescom 2014 , which sparked player outrage and widespread criticism from the gaming press and community .
The game was critically acclaimed , with critics praising its graphics , gameplay , and characterization ; however , some reviewers felt that it did not take enough risks .
By November 2017 , the game had sold nearly seven million copies .
Several downloadable story and content additions have been released for digital purchase .
A sequel , Shadow of the Tomb Raider , was released in September 2018 .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
Rise of the Tomb Raider is a third - person action - adventure game in which players control Lara Croft , who is on a quest to discover the legendary city of Kitezh .
Combat is a major gameplay mechanic ; Lara has a large variety of weapons at her disposal ( including assault rifles , shotguns , and pistols ) , some of which have an alternate firing mode .
Players may also utilize stealth to progress through portions of the game , using bows and arrows to take out enemies , creating distractions to draw enemy attention away from Lara , or hiding in bushes to evade enemies .
Lara can use the environment to fight enemies , shooting explosive barrels , tearing down rope - wrapped structures with rope arrows , or ambushing enemies from high ground .
She can also use her pickaxe and combat knife to engage in melee combat with enemies .
Completing objectives and side content and eliminating enemies give players experience points ( XP ) .
When players collect sufficient XP they level up , receiving a skill point , which can be spent on the game 's three skill trees : brawler , hunter and survivor .
Brawler enhances Lara 's efficiency with weapons , giving her abilities such as retrieving arrows from corpses and a steady aim , as well as boosting her resilience against attack and unlocks new combat skills , such as dodge kill .
Hunter gives her an advantage when dealing with the environments and animals .
Survivor covers a wide range of skills such as creating incendiary bombs and setting booby traps .
Lara learns new languages , enabling her to discover relics ( such as coins ) which can be traded for new equipment .
The game has semi - open hubs for players to explore .
In the hubs are items for Lara to collect , including crafting materials and survival caches .
These items and collectibles such as relics and documents can be revealed to players using Survival Instinct , a vision mode which highlights items of interest .
By collecting the materials , players can craft items with the game 's crafting menu ; Lara can craft ammunition , poisoned arrows ( using death - cap mushrooms ) , and Molotov cocktails and hand grenades from cans and bottles .
The open areas are filled with wildlife , which can be hunted to collect more resources .
Players can discover and explore challenge tombs for new skills and outfits .
Lara 's outfit , which affects her combat performance , can be changed at base camps .
The camps allow Lara to change her weapon loadouts , which is where she chooses one of each weapon type she will wield for example choosing which type of bow ( Makeshift Longbow or Ancient Horn Bow ) or pistol ( Semi - Auto Pistol or Heavy Pistol ) , and are fast travel points which allow players to explore a previously - searched area .
The game has side missions and challenges which may give players new equipment , and players navigate intricate environments to progress .
Lara can use her pickaxe to climb cliff - like surfaces ( such as glaciers ) and her rope arrows to create ziplines to access difficult - to - reach areas , and can climb trees and swim .
Players solve puzzles during the game , in its main campaign and optional content .
The puzzles , based on in - game physics , often connect ; players must solve connecting puzzles to solve a larger one .
Unlike the 2013 Tomb Raider reboot , Rise of the Tomb Raider lacks a multiplayer mode .
It introduces Expeditions , which allow players to replay the game with new constraints and requirements .
The game has four modes : Chapter Replay , Chapter Replay Elite , Score Attack , and Remnant Resistance .
Chapter Replay and Chapter Replay Elite allow players to replay any level , and Elite allows them to bring already - acquired skills and weapons to the level .
Score Attack introduces score combo chains to the game .
Remnant Resistance allows players to create custom scenarios , which can be shared with other players .
By completing Expeditions , players earn credits which can then be used to purchase digital collectible cards to modify the gameplay .
Common cards may be used only once , and foil cards can be used repeatedly .
The cards can also be purchased in microtransactions .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
One year after the events of Tomb Raider , archaeologist Lara Croft is struggling to explain her experience of the supernatural on Yamatai and is experiencing posttraumatic stress disorder .
Looking for answers , she turns to her late father 's research on the lost city of Kitezh and the promise of immortality .
His partner , Ana , attempts to warn her that his obsession with Kitezh drove him to ruin and suicide .
Lara ignores her and organizes an expedition to Syria , hoping to uncover the tomb of the Prophet of Constantinople , who is a key figure in the Kitezh legend .
The tomb is empty , and Lara is interrupted by Trinity — an ancient order of knights turned paramilitary organization investigating the supernatural — and their leader , Konstantin .
As she flees , Lara discovers a symbol etched into the tomb which she links to a book on Russian religious history in her father 's study at the Croft manor .
A Trinity assassin infiltrates the manor and steals the book , prompting Lara and her friend Jonah to go to Siberia .
They are separated by an avalanche while climbing a mountain , and Lara is forced to continue alone .
She discovers that Trinity has made a Soviet - era mine a base of operations in their search for Kitezh .
Lara is caught trying to retrieve the book , and is imprisoned with Ana .
Konstantin forces her to reveal what she knows by slowly strangling Ana in front of her , but Lara can not provide useful information .
Ana then reveals herself as Trinity 's spy , who manipulated her father .
She and Konstantin interrogate Lara about the Divine Source , an artifact believed to bestow immortality .
Lara escapes and helps Jacob , a stranger who leads her through the mines after she agrees to aid him and his people against Trinity .
Jacob is revealed as leader of the Remnant , descendants of the Prophet 's followers , and warns her that the Divine Source is not what she expects it to be .
Konstantin 's forces repeatedly attack the Remnant , justifying the slaughter as God 's will .
However , Lara discovers that Ana is dying and seeks the Divine Source to save herself .
Jacob and Lara decide that the only way to protect the Divine Source is to retrieve it before Trinity can .
Lara recovers the Atlas , an artifact which is a map of Kitezh .
She is reunited with Jonah , and they locate the path into the city .
Konstantin , aware of Jonah 's presence , followed him in the hope of finding Lara .
Trinity ambushes them , and Konstantin stabs Jonah and takes the Atlas .
Lara brings Jonah to Jacob , who heals him and reveals that he is the Prophet , given immortality by the Divine Source .
With Trinity advancing on the glacier which looms over Kitezh , Lara is forced to enter the city on a dangerous path .
She meets the Deathless Ones , the city 's immortal guardians .
Reading journals written by a Trinity agent , Lara realizes the truth of Jacob 's warning : the Divine Source bestows immortality at the cost of one 's self .
The Remnant attack the Deathless Ones , giving Lara time to reach the heart of the city .
She meets Konstantin , who is blocking the path , and critically wounds him .
Before he dies , he says that Lara 's father did not commit suicide but was murdered by Trinity .
Lara is too late to prevent Ana from retrieving the Divine Source , but Ana is overwhelmed by its power and Lara destroys it .
The Deathless Ones perish , and Jacob 's immortality is lost .
Happy that his death has finally come , he thanks Lara and peacefully disintegrates .
Jacob 's daughter , Sofia , leads the Remnant .
Jonah recovers from his wounds and joins Lara in planning their next expedition , with Lara vowing to investigate more of the world 's mysteries and thwart Trinity 's plans .
In a post - credits scene , two weeks before Lara and Jonah leave Siberia , Lara asks Ana if she killed her father .
Ana denies it , admitting that Trinity gave her the order .
She is then killed by a sniper , who asks his unseen superior about killing Lara and is ordered to stand down .
BABA YAGA :
THE TEMPLE OF THE WITCH Section::::Baba Yaga : The Temple of the Witch .
In the Baba Yaga downloadable content , Lara investigates a disturbance in the Soviet mine .
After fighting off a Trinity patrol she finds a young girl , Nadia , hiding in a sawmill .
Nadia confides in Lara about her search for her grandfather , Ivan .
Ivan disappeared while trying to enter the Wicked Vale , a valley reportedly haunted by Baba Yaga , a witch in Slavic folklore .
Ivan blames the witch for the death of his wife , and wants to kill her .
Lara is skeptical about Baba Yaga 's existence but , since Nadia is injured , agrees to enter the Wicked Vale and find Ivan .
In the Vale , Lara is exposed to a rare pollen with potent hallucinogenic properties .
After stumbling through a forest where she is tormented by visions of her father 's suicide , she meets Baba Yaga and a pack of demonic wolves .
Lara narrowly escapes with her life and finds herself in a small , Soviet - era outpost .
She unearths evidence of a secret Soviet biological - weapons project which attempted to harness the pollen , which abruptly ended when the researchers — including Serafima , a biochemist imprisoned in a nearby gulag — succumbed to the hallucinations .
Lara deduces that Serafima weaponized the pollen , developed an antidote and kept her research secret from the military .
With Nadia 's help , Lara synthesizes a basic antidote from Serafima 's recipe and returns to the Wicked Vale .
Resisting the effects of the pollen , Lara finds the injured Ivan at the entrance to Baba Yaga 's lair .
Unable to leave the Wicked Vale while Baba Yaga controls it , Lara battles the witch under the pollen 's influence and destroys its source .
Baba Yaga is revealed as Serafima , who was led to believe that her husband , Ivan , and daughter were dead and used the pollen to become Baba Yaga and torment her captors .
With Ivan , Serafima and Nadia reunited , Lara leaves the Wicked Vale .
COLD DARKNESS AWAKENED Section::::Cold Darkness Awakened .
In the Cold Darkness Awakened content , Lara enters a decommissioned Soviet weapons bunker which has been breached by a Trinity patrol .
Trinity has inadvertently released an unstable pathogen into the air , which causes the people it infects to regress to a zombie - like state .
Men are particularly vulnerable , since the virus stimulates testosterone and adrenaline production .
The pathogen was created to create an army of unstoppable super - soldiers by a Soviet researcher , all of whose experiments failed .
He died in the facility after accidentally releasing the pathogen , proud that he had created a weapon to defend his homeland .
With Sofia and Nadia providing support from a helicopter , Lara tries to find the source of the pathogen before an enormous cloud is released into the atmosphere and contaminates the Remnant valley .
The women plan to channel the pathogen from three towers into the central tower , detonating it and burning off the toxin .
Lara shuts down each tower , collecting equipment , rescuing female prisoners and eliminating waves of the infected Trinity soldiers before entering the core tower .
While fighting off the infected soldiers , she triggers a catastrophic explosion and jumps from the tower to Nadia and Sofia 's helicopter .
Nadia and Lara watch the explosion as they fly to safety .
Although the resulting fire burns the remaining pathogen , documents found in the facility indicate that the release was no accident ; Trinity reactivated the facility to acquire a sample of the pathogen , and an agent of Trinity escaped with it before the bunker was destroyed .
BLOOD TIES AND
LARA 'S NIGHTMARE Section::::Blood Ties and Lara 's Nightmare .
Blood Ties begins with Lara reading a note from her uncle , who says that since her mother disappeared he is the rightful owner of the Croft estate .
With trees working their way into the side of the house and the roof caving in , Lara 's childhood home desperately needs repair .
She finds her father 's safe and searches the manor for its combination , hoping to find his will and thus prove her ownership .
She finds artifacts from her past , and finally figures out the combination ; however , the safe contains no proof of her ownership .
Lara find her mother 's tomb under the main staircase , proof of her death .
With both her parents proven dead , their property passes to her and she moves back in .
Lara 's Nightmare is similar to Blood Ties , with Lara 's uncle unwilling to give her the manor .
She fights off hordes of zombies and skulls before finding the master key .
Lara kills a large skull in the main hallway , ending her nightmare .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Rise of the Tomb Raider was developed by Crystal Dynamics , with Eidos Montreal providing support .
Development of the game began two weeks after the team finished polishing the 2013 reboot .
It was led by Noah Hughes and Brian Horton , the franchise 's creative and game directors respectively .
Rhianna Pratchett returned as the game 's writer , and Camilla Luddington reprised her role as protagonist Lara Croft .
Bobby Tahouri , known for his work on Game of Thrones , composed the soundtrack .
Development was completed on 9 October 2015 , with Crystal Dynamics confirming that the game was declared gold ( indicating that it was being prepared for duplication and release ) .
STORY AND GAMEPLAY Section::::Story and gameplay .
One of the game 's intentions was to craft a more " personal " experience for players , and the team wanted to explore the journey in which Lara becomes the tomb raider .
She becomes determined to uncover more myths , and convinces the world that they are real at the end of the 2013 reboot ; this became her major driving force in the sequel .
Although Lara must still struggle to survive , she is more confident and competent .
The team tried to find a balance , making Lara more experienced and competent but vulnerable in crisis and appealing to players .
They hoped that in the story , players could see Lara 's character progression .
To indicate her hunger for knowledge , the team adjusted the collectibles ; players would learn a new language , unlocking new content and upgrades .
The new crafting system reflects Lara 's resourcefulness , and her ability to use the environment against her enemies highlights her intelligence .
Rhianna Pratchett found Rise of the Tomb Raider more difficult to write than the 2013 reboot , figuring out Lara 's initial mental state and character introduction .
Its cast was significantly smaller than the reboot , so more screen time could be given to each character .
To help establish the game 's tone and visuals , Crystal Dynamics developed a " rippomatic " ( a collection of movie scenes ) .
Films included , which inspired the team about the game 's stealth mechanic ; , whose protagonist ( Sarah Connor ) and Lara Croft are " burdened with a truth that no one believes " .
The Edge and The Grey inspired game scenes in which Lara fought bears and wolves .
Hanna and The Descent inspired the game 's bows , arrows and pickaxe , and Aliens vs. Predator and The Day After Tomorrow helped the team conceive the game 's tundra setting .
They worked on improving the story 's pacing , which Horton thought as important as the story itself .
Several features with gameplay potential but not fitting its context , such as vehicles and an early scene in which Lara battled enemies in a jeep , were cut .
The team listened to player feedback about the original game and made gameplay adjustments , such as reducing the number of quick time events , expanding the hunting system , and increasing the significance of traversing and stealth .
Cinematic moments and action scenes , designed by an internal team known as OMS ( " oh my shit " ) , were retained in the sequel .
The theme of survival remained the story 's core , with the team modifying gameplay accordingly ; the expanded crafting system required players to use the environments more .
However , Crystal Dynamics avoided making it a survival game ; the team felt that it would discourage player exploration .
Like its predecessor , Rise of the Tomb Raider has a structure similar to metroidvania ; the team wanted players to feel that Siberia is a living , dynamic world , and the game not merely a long sequence of events .
According to design director Michael Brinker , the team decided to make the game less " grindy " than other titles ; players would not be forced to complete any optional content .
The skill - upgrades system was overhauled to include more player options .
After the developers listened to player feedback , the game emphasized tomb - raiding more than its predecessors .
According to Hughes , the team analyzed some of the older Tomb Raider titles and distilled their best features while incorporating the reboot 's physics - based puzzles .
They intended to add more ancient tombs , making players feel like real discoverers and inspiring awe .
The tombs were made larger than the reboot , and water puzzles ( featured in older Tomb Raider games ) were included .
The puzzles were often interconnected , with the team adopting a nested - puzzle approach .
Optional tombs were made more meaningful , giving players unique skills and items rather than just experience points .
The difficulty of each tomb slowly increases as players progress .
ART AND MUSIC Section::::Art and music .
The game world was designed to reflect Lara 's distorted mental state , and the team introduced the concept of " ominous beauty " to achieve this .
The color scheme was vibrant , reflecting the game 's large scale .
The team was inspired by other video games and fine art , including Russian realists .
They traveled to Yosemite National Park and several locations in Turkey , including Cappadocia , Istanbul and Ephesus , researching Byzantine culture and Greek architecture to design Syria and Kitezh .
The team took six months to create the game 's snow technology ( such as snow tracks and avalanches ) , which helped increase player immersion in the game .
To add variety to its landscape , the team introduced the Oasis ( with a dramatically - different look from Siberia ) .
Bobby Tahouri 's primary goal in composing the game 's music was to support its narrative .
Tahouri spoke to Crystal Dynamics in 2012 and contracted to write the score in late 2013 , delighted to have more composition time than previous projects .
He listened to the earlier games ' soundtracks to " immerse [ himself ] in the Tomb Raider world " .
The soundtrack was recorded in Nashville by a 52-piece string - and - brass orchestra , including cello , woodwinds , dulcimer and a handpan developed by Saraz Musical Instruments .
The Siberian music features an instrument similar to a gusli and low - pitched male singing .
Dynamic Percussion System middleware creates music as the game is played .
Crystal Dynamics signed Karen O and guitarist David Pajo to produce the game 's theme song , " I Shall Rise " .
TECHNOLOGY Section::::Technology .
Camilla Luddington voiced Lara and provided motion capture at a Los Angeles studio over a two - year period .
According to the actress , one of the greatest challenges in voicing Lara was having to " yell over wind and snow " .
Luddington trained for the role , with experts teaching her how to hold the weapons .
The team wanted to ensure that Lara 's first game for the eighth generation of video game consoles looked good .
Spraying Mova fluorescent paint on Luddington 's face , they obtained 7,000 points of reference .
The team had difficulty developing Lara from motion capture , finding Luddington 's footage too realistic , and tried to give the young Lara " subtle " facial expressions .
They focused on Lara 's physical details in cutscenes , where her muscles tensed as she climbed or her skin became blotchy from the cold .
The studio used pose - based deformers to sculpt Lara 's " exact shape " as she moved .
The team also used wrinkle maps , allowing more natural , realistic movement for the character .
Rise of the Tomb Raider was powered by the Foundation in - house game engine .
The team used global illumination and physics - based rendering to create light and shadows .
They used a Horizon WYSIWYG editor , editing text and graphics in a form closely resembling the finished product .
The team adopted a " kit - bashing technique " , quickly assembling a level with modules and rebuilding it until they were satisfied .
To improve the game 's graphical fidelity , the team partnered with Nixxes Software ( which ported the Xbox 360 version ) .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
On 1 August 2013 , Square Enix Europe executive Phil Rogers announced that a new Tomb Raider game was in development for the eighth generation of video game consoles .
Microsoft announced the game during an E3 2014 press conference , with a scheduled late-2015 release .
At Gamescom 2014 , the company said that Rise of the Tomb Raider would be an exclusive for its Xbox series of video - game platforms , including Xbox 360 and Xbox One ; according to Microsoft Studios executive Phil Spencer , it would be a timed exclusive similar to Microsoft 's deal with Capcom and Crytek on Dead Rising 3 and ( in which both were released for Microsoft Windows ) .
This sparked player outrage from players ( since Tomb Raider had a longer history with PlayStation ) , who blamed franchise owner Square Enix for the decision .
Microsoft 's calling the game " exclusive on Xbox for holiday 2015 " caused confusion among the gaming press and players .
Rogers explained in 2015 that the Microsoft timed exclusivity was primarily due to the company 's strong support for the 2013 reboot .
Crystal Dynamics head Darrell Gallagher said that the partnership could help the team " deliver the best game that [ they ] can " .
Rogers called the arrangement a " natural " evolution and a " tough " decision .
Rise of the Tomb Raider was released on 10 November 2015 , and the Windows version was released on 28 January 2016 .
Microsoft Studios was the game 's publisher for Xbox 360 and Xbox One .
An 18-issue comic series , Tomb Raider , began publication in early 2014 .
Produced by Dark Horse Comics and written by Pratchett and Gail Simone , the comics bridged the gap between the 2013 reboot and Rise of the Tomb Raider and explained the absence of some secondary characters in the sequel .
Microsoft released a Rise of the Tomb Raider Xbox One bundle , including an Xbox One console , a code for and the game .
A collector 's edition included a 12-inch statue of Lara , a steelbook , a jade necklace and a replica of Lara 's journal .
A season pass included the base game , additional outfits , weapons and expedition cards , and access to downloadable content .
GameStop preorders had exclusive access to the Holy Fire Card Pack , which can be used in the game 's expeditions mode .
Microsoft live - streamed a Survival Billboard marketing event on Twitch.tv .
Eight contestants standing in front of a Southwark Street billboard were subjected to different harsh weather conditions , which were voted by Twitch 's viewers .
The contestant enduring the weather longest received a " Tomb Raider - themed trip
" Players could earn in - game rewards by participating ( and interacting with )
Twitch live - streaming in expedition mode .
The game was supported by downloadable content , and its first post - launch update was released on 4 December 2015 .
It introduced an endurance mode , with elements of a survival game as Lara hunts and crafts items while facing hidden dangers and environmental hazards .
The first story add - on ,
Baba Yaga :
The Temple of the Witch , was released on 26 January 2016 for Xbox One .
Cold Darkness Awakened , the third DLC , introduced a horde mode in which Lara fights waves of infected enemies .
A Rise of the Tomb Raider : 20th Year Celebration edition was released for PlayStation 4 on 11 October 2016 .
The edition ( developed by Nixxes Software and Crystal Dynamics ) adds several new features , including a classic outfit inspired by Tomb Raider III ; cooperative gameplay for endurance mode ; Blood Ties , a combat - free mode in which Lara explores the Croft manor ; and Lara 's Nightmare , in which players fight infected enemies in the manor .
The DLC was free of charge to season - pass holders .
To promote the 20th Year Celebration edition , the marketing team hung a jeep from the side of a building in Times Square .
Blood Ties supported PlayStation VR when 20th Year Celebration was released , and Oculus Rift and HTC Vive were supported on 6 December 2017 .
Feral Interactive released the game for macOS and Linux in April 2018 .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
Rise of the Tomb Raider received " generally positive reviews " according to review aggregator Metacritic .
The game 's graphics were praised by critics .
Kimberly Wallace of Game Informer called them " stunning " and praised Crystal Dynamics for creating detailed environments for players to explore , although she noted several frame rate issues .
Spencer Campbell of Electronic Gaming Monthly agreed , describing the areas as " gorgeous " and noting that every location in the game looked unique .
Justin Towell of GamesRadar praised the game 's presentation and appreciated its animation , noting that it was a AAA production .
Steven Hansen of Destructoid called it one of the best - looking games on the market , although he considered some of the lighting unrealistic .
Wallace praised the story for several memorable moments , although she thought it was predictable except for the ending scene .
She liked the writers ' decision to explore the relationship between Lara and her father and with Trinity , which she found interesting .
Campbell criticized the story for being simple and formulaic ; it " took too many cues " from Raiders of the Lost Ark , and its characters were undeveloped and forgettable .
Mike Mahardy of GameSpot wrote that the story was emotional and the characters grounded and believable ; its mysticism " makes sense within the world they occupy " , and he called the story tragic but uplifting .
Towell praised the story for several surprising moments and was largely impressed by the voice acting , although he was disappointed that the story was so similar to the 2013 reboot .
Peter Paras of Game Revolution singled out Luddington 's performance as Lara , saying that she " imbues the character with a sense of wonderment and determination " .
Lucy O'Brien of IGN called Lara an " endearing " character driven by " complex ambitions " , and described the game 's villains as " strong " .
Wallace found Rise of the Tomb Raider combat entertaining overall , and enjoyed the stealth section .
She liked the upgrade trees ( which accommodate different styles of play ) , but found later combat sections repetitious .
Campbell called the stealth section satisfyingly challenging , and enjoyed the range of player choices .
He noted the combat 's more - strategic nature , due to its larger arsenal .
Mahardy called the combat " superb " , praising the game for giving players the freedom to experiment with gameplay mechanics .
He found the resource - gathering tedious , but the crafting system well - executed .
Towell liked the game 's combat and stealth , comparing it to and noting that Lara often felt like a " cold - blooded killer " due to the abundance of combat .
He felt that there were too many items to collect .
O'Brien found some combat sections uninspired , but the new crafting abilities made them more enjoyable .
She called the stealth component enjoyable but redundant .
Although Hansen liked the addition of stealth , he said that Rise did not address the problems with the 2013 reboot ( in which Lara was too violent , causing narrative dissonance ) .
Wallace praised the game 's abundant side content , finding it intriguing enough to lure her away from the main story .
She liked the Metroidvania world design , and the large hubs encouraged her to explore .
Wallace enjoyed the expanded tombs and the puzzles , which were deeper and more intricate than those in the previous game .
Campbell praised its hunting mechanic , which enhanced the game world .
He wrote that the narrative shortcomings were balanced by gameplay complexity , particularly the optional tomb puzzles .
Mahardy praised the open hubs ' " waterfall structure " , where every player action may unlock new possibilities ; however , Towell found the hubs filled with aimless , unappealing content .
O'Brien called the challenge tombs the game 's highlight ( paying homage to the older Tomb Raider games ) , despite its shortage of puzzles .
Hansen found much of the content " open world busywork " , which he compared to the Assassin 's Creed game series .
Paras wrote that the expedition mode was a " real treat " ; Oli Welsh of Eurogamer criticized it , saying that there was no reason for the mode to exist other than to please YouTubers and generate revenue from microtransactions .
Wallace called Rise of the Tomb Raider " better in every way " than the 2013 reboot , and said that the game had high replayability .
Campbell was disappointed by the story , but considered the game an overall improvement on its predecessor .
Towell called the game a " safe sequel " which took few risks , but had a successful formula ; O'Brien agreed that it succeeded in refining its predecessor 's formula .
Hansen found much of the game 's content bloated ; although it was an improvement , he criticized it for not fixing many of the original 's shortcomings .
According to Paras , the Tomb Raider franchise surpassed gaming classics such as Resident Evil 4 and after 20 years with Rise of the Tomb Raider .
SALES Section::::Sales .
Some gaming journalists were concerned about Rise of the Tomb Raider sales , since it was released on the same day as Fallout 4 ( a highly - anticipated game from Bethesda Game Studios , which also had Microsoft as its marketing partner ) .
However , Microsoft believed that the games would not compete with one another .
It was the fourth - bestselling game in the UK and Ireland in its week of release , debuting at number four in the UK retail software sales chart ( behind Fallout 4 , and FIFA 16 ) .
However , the game did not sell well enough in the month after its release to appear on the NPD Group chart .
According to Square Enix , its initial commercial performance was " solid " ; game director Brian Horton and Microsoft executive Aaron Greenberg said that Microsoft Studios and Square Enix were satisfied with the game 's sales .
Digitally , the Windows version sold three times better than the Xbox One version in the first month of release .
The game had sold over one million copies by the end of 2015 , and nearly seven million copies by November 2017 .
AWARDS
33rd Golden Joystick Awards
68th
Writers Guild of America Awards
rowspan="9
" 19th Annual D.I.C.E. Awards SEQUEL Section::::Sequel .
On 15 March 2018 , Shadow of the Tomb Raider was confirmed by Square Enix .
It is the third game in the rebooted origin story .
Eidos Montreal replaced Crystal Dynamics as the game 's lead developer .
It was released worldwide on PlayStation 4 , Xbox One , and Microsoft Windows on 14 September 2018 .
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS