FINDERS KEEPERS ( KING NOVEL )
Finders Keepers is a crime novel by American writer Stephen King , published on June 2 , 2015 .
It is the second volume in a trilogy focusing on Detective Bill Hodges , following Mr. Mercedes .
The book is about the murder of reclusive writer John Rothstein ( an amalgamation of John Updike , Philip Roth , and J. D. Salinger ) , his missing notebooks and the release of his killer from prison after 35 years .
The book 's cover was revealed on King 's official site on January 30 .
An excerpt was published in the May 15 , 2015 issue of Entertainment Weekly .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
In 1978 , petty criminal Morris Bellamy robs and murders acclaimed author John Rothstein for ending his famous Runner trilogy on an unsatisfactory note .
Prior to the murder , Rothstein had been in reclusive retirement , never publishing another novel but continuing to write in private .
More important than the money he steals , Morris covets Rothstein 's invaluable notebooks , which contain two books which properly finish the arc of the Runner series .
After the murder , Morris hides Rothstein 's cash and Moleskine notebooks in a trunk buried near a creek behind his childhood home .
Before he can read the manuscripts , Morris is sentenced to life in prison for another crime .
Rothstein 's murder is never solved .
In the present day , young Peter Saubers now lives in Morris 's old home .
His father , Tom , was disabled in the events that opened Mr. Mercedes , and the Saubers family is on the brink of financial and emotional ruin .
Peter discovers the buried trunk and secretly uses the money to keep his family afloat for the next few years , while gradually becoming engrossed in the Rothstein notebooks .
When the money runs out , Pete , now a teenager aware of the true value of his discovery , comes up with a plan to profit from the notebooks .
At the same time , Morris , now nearly sixty , has finally been granted parole .
He goes to retrieve the buried trunk , only to find it empty .
Morris is obsessed with finding the notebooks and learning the ultimate outcome of the Runner series .
His search for the notebooks eventually leads him to Peter 's family .
As a deadly cat - and - mouse game begins , private detective Bill Hodges , the man who brought down the murderous Mr. Mercedes , is gradually drawn into the mystery of the unknown benefactor who helped the Sauberses through their rough patch .
He knows young Pete is hiding something , but he does n't know that the missing piece of the puzzle is the answer to the decades - old cold case – John Rothstein 's murder .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Finders Keepers received mixed to positive reviews .
In her review for The Guardian , Alison Flood praised the book as " expertly plotted " and a " fresh take " on one of King 's favorite subjects - " the relationship between a writer and their fans . "
Janet Maslin of the New York Times wrote that while Finders Keepers " feels very much like a middle volume , " it was still a page - turner , and praised the jumps between time periods and the " very appealing trio of crime - solvers who joined forces in ' Mr. Mercedes . ' "
Nick Romeo of The Boston Globe was more critical , faulting the " somewhat outlandish plot " and how " [ d]eeper themes about the power of fiction feel somewhat grafted onto the suspenseful story . "
TELEVISION ADAPTATION Section::::Television adaptation .
On October 10 , 2017 , the Audience network announced that the TV series based on the first Bill Hodges novel , Mr. Mercedes , is renewed for season 2 , which will be based on original Mr. Mercedes novel , Finders Keepers and End of Watch .
REFERENCES