SKYSCRAPER ( ROLLER COASTER )
Skyscraper is an upcoming roller coaster that will be located at the planned Skyplex complex in Orlando , Florida .
Under development by American and Swiss manufacturers US Thrill Rides and Intamin , the attraction will be a Polercoaster model which utilizes an observation tower as its main support structure .
After several delays , Skyscraper is expected to open in 2020 with construction on the Skyplex complex beginning in 2017 .
Upon completion , it will become the tallest roller coaster in the world at over and will feature both the steepest drop and highest inversion .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 2012 , owners of Mango 's Tropical Café in Orlando selected the Polercoaster design concept pitched by US Thrill Rides to become their flagship attraction at the future - planned Skyplex indoor entertainment complex .
After several successful negotiations for land , development of both the roller coaster and Skyplex began .
In May 2014 , investment for the project was sought , and a website was formed to assist with the endeavor .
Documents uncovered by an Orlando news agency revealed that the roller coaster would be located in Central Florida along International Drive at the intersection with Sand Lake Road .
Skyscraper was officially announced on June 5 , 2014 .
Construction on the main complex was expected to begin in 2015 , with the ride opening in 2016 .
However , design changes and a lengthy process for obtaining the necessary permits has caused several delays in breaking ground , and the timeline was updated to reflect construction on the complex beginning in mid-2017 .
, portions of the roller coaster 's track had been completed by Intamin and were in storage , but the start of construction in Orlando was on hold pending the approval of permits .
Skyplex is scheduled to open in 2019 , and Skyscraper is expected to make its debut in 2020 .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
Designed by US Thrill Rides , the steel track of Skyscraper will be approximately long .
Wrapping around the central tower , the roller coaster will feature seven inversions including zero - g rolls and raven turns .
When complete , Skyscraper will operate with several small trains .
Each train will have two rows that seat four riders each for a total of eight riders per train .
The ride is expected to accommodate a theoretical capacity of 1000 riders per hour .
Each seat will feature a lap restraint as opposed to over - the - shoulder harnesses to avoid obstructing the view .
RECORDS Section::::Records .
When Skyscraper opens it will break several world records .
With a structure exceeding in height , it is expected to obtain the record for the world 's tallest roller coaster .
, Kingda Ka at Six Flags Great Adventure standing at holds the record .
Skyscraper will have an inversion near the highest point of the ride , breaking GateKeeper 's record for the highest inversion in the world , set at Cedar Point in 2013 .
The ride will also have the steepest drop in the world at 123 degrees , exceeding the 121-degree drop record set in 2011 by Takabisha at Fuji - Q Highland .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * SKYPLEX
ENTERTAINMENT PROJECT
NOW UNDERWAY , I-4 Exit Guide