PETALS ON THE WIND ( FILM ) Petals on the Wind is a 2014 Lifetime movie sequel to the 2014 adaptation Flowers in the Attic , starring Heather Graham , Rose McIver , Wyatt Nash , Bailey Buntain and Ellen Burstyn .
It is based on V. C. Andrews ' 1980 novel of the same name , the second novel on the Dollanganger series .
The film follows the surviving Dollanganger children — Cathy , Chris and Carrie — ten years after escaping the attic .
Despite attempting to move on with their lives , after multiple failed attempts and tragedies occur , Cathy decides it 's time to take revenge on her mother .
Lifetime first announced the film shortly before Flowers in the Attic was released .
The network announced on the premiere of the movie the developing of the following books of the Dollanganger series , If There Be Thorns and Seeds of Yesterday , both of which aired in 2015 .
The film received a positive response from critics .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Ten years after escaping from Foxworth Hall , the surviving Dollanganger children - Cathy , Chris , and Carrie - attend the funeral of their adoptive father , Paul Sheffield , who took them in .
They are still traumatized by their grandmother 's abuse and their mother 's betrayal , which led to the death of Carrie 's twin , Cory .
Meanwhile , their grandmother , Olivia , is an invalid after having suffered a stroke a couple of years prior .
Corrine has avoided all contact with her children and begins to renovate Foxworth Hall so she can take full ownership of the mansion .
Cathy has become an aspiring ballet dancer , Chris is in medical school , and Carrie is enrolled in an elite high school , but is constantly bullied for her small size .
Cathy meets and is attracted to Julian Marquet , a fellow dancer .
On their first date , he invites her to go to New York with him to try for a leading role in Romeo and Juliet , which she accepts .
Later that night , Cathy and Chris admit that they still have feelings for each other and give into their passion , making love .
However , Cathy insists they must find others to love and live normal lives .
The conversation reveals that Cathy was pregnant with Chris ' child , conceived from their first sexual encounter while they were imprisoned , but miscarried .
Although Chris says he can never love anyone but her , Cathy leaves for New York with Julian the next day with hopes of starting afresh with him .
Chris begins a relationship with Sarah Reeves , the daughter of his boss at the hospital where he works .
Cathy 's relationship with Julian quickly deteriorates as he shows a dark and abusive side .
When she attempts to leave , Julian threatens to kill her and Chris .
He drops her during ballet try - outs and injures her leg , ruining her chance of getting her desired role .
She manages to sneak away to see Chris graduate from medical school , but denies anything is wrong when he sees her black eye .
Cathy returns to Julian after he shows regret for having abused her and helps her get the role of Juliet by putting glass in the original dancer 's shoes .
Cathy agrees to let Carrie stay with her and Julian to escape the relentless bullying at school .
During the ballet , Chris catches Julian touching Carrie and a violent confrontation ensues .
Julian drives off and Cathy goes with him .
Cathy reveals she is pregnant with Julian 's child , which causes an already erratically driving Julian to have an accident .
Julian dies and Cathy is injured , but alive .
Ten months later , after the birth of her son , Jory , Cathy opens her own ballet school .
Carrie meets and falls in love with a local minister named Alex , who proposes .
Carrie is unsure about being a minister 's wife , recalling their grandmother 's statement that all ministers are evil , but Cathy tells her to forget the past and look towards the future .
Carrie encounters Corrine at a charity gathering and invites her to the wedding , but Corrine denies Carrie as her daughter .
The next morning , Cathy and Chris find that Carrie has committed suicide by consuming poison - laced doughnuts ( the same technique that was used to kill her twin ) .
Cathy vows revenge on their murdering mother , despite Chris warily trying to talk her out of it .
She hires Corrine 's husband Bart Winslow as her attorney , under the guise of reviving the Sheffield estate , with the intent of seducing him .
Bart is instantly attracted to her and they begin an affair .
Pressured by his boss , Chris proposes to Sarah and she accepts .
However , the day before the wedding , Chris admits to Cathy he still loves her and does n't want to marry Sarah .
Cathy tells him that while she still does love him , she wants him to move on with his life , as their relationship ca n't lead to anything .
Despite this , the two irresistibly end up sharing a passionate kiss .
Sarah walks in and , horrified , ends her engagement with Chris , who is fired from his job as rumors of the incestuous relationship spread .
Chris asks Cathy to bring Jory and start a new life with him in California , where no one will know them .
However , Cathy reveals that she is pregnant with Bart 's child and intends to finish what she started .
Chris decides to go with her to finally confront their mother and they sneak into Foxworth Hall on the day of Corrine 's Christmas party .
Cathy encounters her grandmother and confronts her about her religious hypocrisy and abuse towards her and her siblings .
Undeterred , Olivia tells her that while she can abandon the family she will nevertheless forever be " the devil 's spawn . "
During the party , Cathy reveals her identity and her mother 's crimes to the stunned guests .
Corrine initially denies everything , but Bart is suspicious and Olivia refuses to defend her .
Corrine finally admits to everything , but insists she never intended to kill Cory or have the children put in the attic , defending her actions on the basis that her father would have rejected her and left all of them out of his will .
Cathy then publicly reveals her pregnancy caused by Bart .
Corrine blames Olivia for forcing her to put the children in the attic .
Olivia counters that the children are abominations and did n't deserve to be born .
She gives Corrine a trunk of her old possessions , which when opened reveal the skeletal remains of Cory .
Corrine has a mental breakdown and sets the bed and her mother on fire .
Bart rushes in to save Olivia , but they both die in the flames .
Cathy and Chris escape and watch Foxworth Hall burn to the ground .
Six years later , Cathy and Chris are now married and happily living in California with Jory and Bart Jr. under the surname Dollanganger .
Corrine is institutionalized and deemed incompetent to stand trial for her crimes .
CAST * Heather Graham as Corrine Winslow * Ellen Burstyn as Olivia Foxworth
* Rose McIver as Cathy Dollanganger
* Wyatt Nash as Christopher Dollanganger , Jr. * Bailey De Young as Carrie Dollanganger * Ellia English as Henny
* Nick Searcy as Dr. Reeves * Whitney Hoy as Sarah Reeves * Dylan Bruce as Bart Winslow * Will Kemp as Julian Marquet * Helen Nasilski as Marisha Marquet * George Korov as Ravil Isyanov * Stephanie Kim as Yolanda Lange
* Ross Philips as Alex Conroy * Skyler Vallo as Lacey St. Morgan * Megan Easton as Ashley
* Molly Hagan as Miss Calhoun
* Gabriel Bateman as Michael
* Talitha Bateman as Emma PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT AND WRITING Section::::Production . Section::::Development and writing .
Lifetime first announced plans to adapt the second book in the Dollanganger series on January 9 , 2014 , just before they aired Flowers in the Attic .
It was also announced by writer Kayla Alpert that the film would take place ten years after Flowers in the Attic , whereas the book picked up directly after the events of the first .
Alpert stated that she started working on the script for Petals on the Wind , shortly after she had finished the script for the first film .
Executive producer Michelle Weiss stated that adapting Petals on the Wind into film proved to be more difficult that the first one did .
She said that while Flowers was a contained story that took place within only one location , Petals has a larger setting , more storylines and takes place during a longer period of time .
The biggest challenge was the contain the story within a contained timeframe .
She also stated the film takes place in Southern United States during the 70 's .
CASTING AND FILMING Section::::Casting and filming .
On January 28 , 2014 it was announced that Heather Graham and Ellen Burstyn would reprise their roles from Flowers in the Attic as Corrine and Olivia Foxworth , respectively .
On February 18 it was revealed that Rose McIver had landed the role of Cathy Dollanganger , taking over from Kiernan Shipka .
During the same month , it was revealed that Wyatt Nash had been cast as Christopher ; Bailey De Young role as Carrie was announced the following day .
McIver stated that due to the film 's rushed production , she only had two weeks after her first audition to practice ballet for her role , before filming started on February 25 ; this left her unable to read any of the books .
Regarding Cathy and Chris ' relationshi , she stated that both of the characters " know [ their relationship ] 's a taboo , but nobody else understands them the way they get each other " and due to their shared trauma , it 's hard for them to connect with anyone else .
Nash expressed a similar sentiment , believing that it 's impossible for either of them to move forward and live happy lives apart from each other .
Production for the movie was rushed and actress Rose McIver , who portrayed Cathy , began filming in February 2014 , two weeks after she attended her first audition , leaving her unable to read any of the novels before portraying the role .
Immediately after filming was completed in March McIver began work on the television series iZombie .
A new character , that of Chris 's love interest Sarah , was created for the movie and some portions of the book , notably the sexual relationship between Cathy and her adoptive father , were removed in order to condense the book for film .
Of this choice , director Kayla Alpert stated that " After doing incest , we decided we did n't need pedophilia on top of it " and that some of the book 's plot had to be condensed for the movie .
RELEASE
RATINGS
Section::::Release .
Section::::Ratings .
In its original televised airing , Petals on the Wind was watched by 3.42 million viewers , and had a rating of 1.2 in the women 18 - 49 age demographic , down 37 percent from the 1.9 earned by Flowers .
HOME MEDIA RELEASES Section::::Home media releases .
On September 16 , 2015 , it was released as a single - disc DVD .
It was later re - released on June 23 , 2015 , with Flowers in the Attic as a " Double Feature .
"
On November 10 , 2015 , it was included in a " 4-Film Collection " with Flowers in the Attic , If There Be Thorns , and Seeds of Yesterday .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Petals on the Wind averaged 64 out of 100 , based on four critics , on Metacritic , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Variety reviewed the film , stating that it " looks and feels like a rush job , but improves on its predecessor in nearly every way .
"
The A.V. Club gave the movie a rating of B- , as they felt that it " largely skews a bit underbaked to meet the promise of its own third act , and lacks the strength of Ellen Burstyn as its central figure , but there 's enough of the all - out V.C. Andrews flavor to make this installment worth a look for those who want to catch up with a family of soap people 30 years in the making . "
Entertainment Weekly described the film as being " muted " , similarly to the first one , and stated that the actors should n't have taken the material as seriously as they did .
Despite this , they found the film to have numerous instances that either meet or exceed the book 's " ludicrous level " .
SEQUELS Section::::Sequels .
On the premiere of Petals on the Wind , Lifetime announced the production of the two following books on the Dollanganger series , If There Be Thorns and Seeds of Yesterday , both set to premiere in 2015 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS