RORY MCILROY PGA TOUR
Rory McIlroy PGA Tour is a golf video game by EA Tiburon .
First announced at E3 2014 , it was released on July 14 , 2015 for PlayStation 4 and Xbox One , coinciding with the 2015 Open Championship .
The game was re - built from scratch as part of its shift to eighth generation consoles , adopting the Frostbite 3 engine from EA DICE 's Battlefield franchise due to its graphical fidelity and ability to handle courses as large - scale maps ( as opposed to having an individual map for each hole ) .
Additionally , the game introduces new swing modes and assists , Golf Channel personalities and in - game presentation , and an arcade - style challenge mode .
It is the first entry in EA Sports ' PGA Tour series since 1998 not to feature Tiger Woods as its namesake , replacing him with Rory McIlroy , who was world number one at the time of the game 's release .
Rory McIlroy PGA Tour received mixed reviews ; although critics acknowledged the game 's increased graphics quality and realism over previous installments in the franchise , the game was criticized primarily for its regressions over previous entries in the franchise , including a small number of available courses on launch , and the removal of various modes and features that had been present in previous PGA Tour games .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Electronic Arts ' PGA Tour franchise was placed on a hiatus following its 2013 release , Tiger Woods PGA Tour 14 ; in October 2013 , EA announced that the game would also be the final installment in the series co - branded with Tiger Woods , and that he would be replaced by a new title golfer for its next edition .
At EA 's E3 press conference in June 2014 , the company presented footage of the next game in the series under the working title EA Sports PGA Tour .
On March 16 , 2015 , it was announced that Rory McIlroy would serve as the new title athlete , naming the game Rory McIlroy PGA Tour .
It was scheduled to be released in June 2015 , before being delayed to July 14 , 2015 .
Unlike other recent EA Sports titles , which were unified around the Ignite engine , Rory McIlroy PGA Tour utilizes the Frostbite 3 engine , originally developed by DICE for the Battlefield franchise .
The Frostbite engine allows an entire course to be rendered all at once on a single map , rather than on a hole - by - hole basis — reducing loading times between holes .
Executive producer Brent Nielsen explained that Frostbite 3 was tailored towards " creating complex , lifelike environments " , and that it allowed the team to " recreate some of the world 's most beautiful courses , as well as create some new ideas of our own . "
Producer Ryan Ferwerda explained that the changes necessitated a complete rebuild of the game from scratch .
Rory McIlroy PGA Tour features Golf Channel in - game presentation .
Golf Channel analysts Rich Lerner and Frank Nobilo replaced CBS 's Jim Nantz and David Feherty as the game 's commentators .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
Rory McIlroy PGA Tour contains some new features , assists and gameplay changes .
New Backswing Meter , Aiming Arc , and putt read features were added to assist players in making accurate shots .
Three main swing modes are offered ; " Arcade " , which uses the analog sticks to swing and allows application of spin to the ball in mid - air , the traditional " 3-Click " , and " Tour"—an advanced mode similar to Arcade mode , but with no assists enabled at all and higher sensitivity .
Players can toggle individual assists to customize their experience .
The new engine provides more realistic physics and interactions between the ball and aspects of the environment , such as accounting for firmness and grass length , and shooting balls through plants and trees .
As an entire course is now treated as a single map , errant shots can also land and be played from areas that were previously considered out - of - bounds and incurred penalties .
A new mode , Night Club Challenge , requires players to make shots at targets in a nightclub - inspired setting .
Some features were removed in comparison to PGA Tour 14 ; amateur ( aside from a Web.com Tour event for earning the player 's PGA Tour membership ) and women 's events were removed , as well as certain alternate modes ( such as Stableford scoring ) beyond stroke and match play , the ability to play individual or certain types of holes ( only back 9 , front 9 , or 18 can be played ) , online Country Clubs Quick Tournament , weather , and career schedules .
COURSES Section::::Courses .
Rory McIlroy PGA Tour includes eight real - world courses on - disc ; Bay Hill , Chambers Bay , the Old Course at St. Andrews , Royal Troon , TPC Boston , TPC Sawgrass , Whistling Straits , and Wolf Creek .
TPC Scottsdale was a pre - order exclusive .
Additional courses will be added through downloadable content .
Four fantasy courses are also offered , including one based on the Battlefield 4 map Paracel Storm , the Grand Canyon , and a nightclub - themed course for the game 's new challenge mode .
Due to an expired license , Augusta National and the Masters Tournament do not appear in the game , although an EA representative has suggested that the course may be re - introduced as DLC in the future .
UPDATES Section::::Updates .
Free updates have been released to add additional features to the game .
TPC Scottsdale , East Lake Golf Club , the fantasy course Treasure Island , and Quail Hollow Club were added in August , September , October , and November 2015 , respectively .
The Quail Hollow update re - introduced alternate shot , best ball , four ball , and skins play .
Henrik Stenson and Dustin Johnson were also added as playable characters in October and November 2015 respectively .
PGA West Stadium Course was added in January 2016 .
In March 2016 , Oakmont Country Club ( host of the 2016 U.S. Open ) was added , as well as additional commentary dialogue in relation to it .
An update in May 2016 added Banff Springs , a recurring course from previous PGA Tour games .
The update also introduced changes to the behavior of majors in career mode , which now alternate between one of two included courses that had recently hosted it , such as Chambers Bay ( 2015 ) and Oakmont for the U.S. Open , St. Andrews ( 2015 ) and Royal Troon ( 2016 ) for the Open Championship , and Whistling Straits ( 2015 ) and Quail Hollow ( 2017 ) for the PGA Championship .
REMOVED FROM EA ACCESS Section::::Removed From EA Access .
EA has announced that the golfing game will be removed from the service EA Access the May 22 2018 .
The game will no longer be available to download or play from the EA Access console app or the Xbox Store and to PSN .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Video game review aggregator Metacritic lists Rory McIlroy PGA Tour with an aggregate score of 60 based on critic reviews , indicating " mixed or average " reception .
Polygon gave Rory McIlroy PGA Tour a 6 out of 10 ; the game was praised for the improvements brought by its new engine ( including its visual appearance , short loading times , and ball physics ) , the new putting system , its career progression , which now allowed players to " [ deepen their ] package of abilities instead of forcing him or her to be pure power , pure accuracy or down the middle "
, " lifelike " crowds , Golf Channel commentators that were " much more conversational than the wooden and overacted delivery of Jim Nantz " , albeit somewhat repetitive .
The game was criticized for its lack of courses and events ( with only two of the Men 's majors represented , and the removal of LPGA events and all but one Web.com Tour event ) , limited character creation options , as well as the removal of features that were present in previous editions of the PGA Tour franchise .
The challenge mode was considered fun , but not comparable to modes in previous installments that focused on the history of golf .
As a result , Polygon concluded that Rory McIlroy PGA Tour was " a smooth - playing game of golf , which makes the inability to use its new gameplay on the old features fans loved even more regrettable . "
IGN was similarly negative , giving the game a 5.5 out of 10 ; although praising the new swing modes and assists for allowing players to customize gameplay to better suit their play style , and the new Frostbite engine for being " appreciably superior than the links of the last generation — even if some of the textures are a little flat and a lot of the course features tend to pop in around the path of the ball 's flight " ,
Rory McIlroy PGA Tour was criticized for its lack of content and the removal of features that were present in previous installments of EA Sports ' PGA Tour franchise .
The lack of features was most apparent in career mode , which saw the removal of bonus objectives , practice rounds , career schedules and the trophy room among others , joking that " if a professional career in golf was really this unrewarding and directionless , Rory McIlroy would probably have set his sights on a Masters in Accounting rather than the one in Augusta .
" They concluded that " concessions are often made when sports games straddle the gap between console generations old and new , but considering the two year wait for a game that is only being released on current - gen hardware , the rampant slash and burn of its feature set is particularly galling .
EA Tiburon has managed to create a golf game with plenty of holes in it ; just not the kind that fans will relish . "
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Rory Mcllroy PGA Tour Official Site