TAXI BROOKLYN
Taxi Brooklyn is a French - American action - comedy police procedural television series , produced by EuropaCorp Television .
The series stars Chyler Leigh and Jacky Ido , and is based upon the film Taxi written by Luc Besson .
On March 6 , 2015 , NBC canceled the series in the United States .
SYNOPSIS
Section::::Synopsis .
Caitlin " Cat " Sullivan is an NYPD detective working in Brooklyn .
After her driving privileges are suspended , she relies on Leo Romba , a Brooklyn cab driver from France .
Leo becomes Cat 's driver and a de facto consultant on her cases .
While solving crimes with Leo , Cat is also running her own unauthorized investigation into the death of her father , an NYPD detective thought to have been killed by the Capella crime family .
In doing so , she clashes with her boss , Captain Baker , and her ex - husband Gregg , who has picked up the case for the FBI .
CAST MAIN * Chyler Leigh as Detective Caitlin Mary Darcy " Cat " Sullivan , a second - generation , Irish - American detective with the fictional 125th Precinct ( in reality , the precinct that serves the Prospect Park area is the 78th Precinct ) .
She achieved some level of notoriety after capturing the " Prospect Park Stalker " .
After her driving privileges are suspended , she commandeers Leo Romba , a French taxi driver , to become her personal valet .
She is recently divorced from FBI Special Agent Gregg James .
She attended Catholic school , where she was starting point guard during her senior year on both her school 's All - City and All - State teams , but is now a lapsed Catholic .
Growing up , she was best friends with Annabella Capella ( Justine Cotsonas ) , the granddaughter of the head of the Capella crime family who has since taken over the family business .
She is highly uncomfortable with her mother 's affair with the police captain .
Her late father was a dirty cop on the Capella family 's payroll , who murdered Annabella 's grandfather to escape an Internal Affairs investigation , and was killed in revenge .
* Jacky Ido as Leo Romba , a Brooklyn cab driver from Marseille , France , who becomes Cat 's driver and a consultant for the 125th Precinct .
He spent four years in a French prison for serving as a getaway driver ; he testified against the robbers and spent two years in solitary confinement .
As a result , Leo has developed claustrophobia .
He has a son , Nico , that he loves very much , and an ex - wife , Aimee , who has since remarried .
He considers Frankie ( Cat 's mother ) a close friend .
In " Revenge " , it is revealed that Aimee is separated from her new husband ; she and Nico are kidnapped immediately after their arrival in New York by Leo 's former partner - in - crime , Henry .
* James Colby as Captain John Baker , the commander of the 125th Precinct .
He is Cat 's godfather , and recently he has begun an affair with her mother .
* José Zúñiga as Detective Eddie Esposito , Cat 's co - worker and rival at the 125th Precinct .
* Jennifer Esposito as Dr. Monica Pena , a medical examiner with the Brookyn Borough Office of the Chief Medical Examiner and a friend of Cat 's .
* Bill Heck as Special Agent Gregg James , an FBI agent and Cat 's ex - husband .
In " Revenge " , he is shot by a Capella family shooter .
* Ally Walker as Frankie Sullivan , Cat 's widowed mother .
She and Leo are good friends .
* Raul Casso as Ronnie , a fellow cab driver and a close friend of Leo 's ; notable for a mock - flamboyant personality .
RECURRING
* Luke Roberts as Rhys * Caterina Murino as Giada
EPISODES
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
Taxi Brooklyn premiered in Belgium on March 21 , 2014 , on La Deux , and in France on April 14 , 2014 , on TF1 .
In the United States , the series premiered on June 25 , 2014 , on NBC , and in both Australia and the United Kingdom on May 25 , 2015 on Netflix . RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Rotten Tomatoes has a critic 's consensus rating of 38 % .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS *
( TF1 ) * ( NBC )