PAIGE LARSON Paige Larson is a fictional character on the NBC soap opera Days of Our Lives .
Introduced by executive producers Ken Corday , Lisa de Cazotte and Greg Meng , the character is portrayed by True O'Brien , who first appeared in March 2014 and departed in September 2015 after her character was killed off .
O'Brien would later make brief appearances via flashbacks and visions on until October 2015 .
O'Brien once again returned to the role for a one - off appearance in October 2017 .
Paige is introduced as a good samaritan who returns JJ Deveraux ( Casey Moss ) his wallet which he dropped and is in a relationship with him for majority of her time on the show .
She is the daughter of Eve Donovan ( Kassie DePaiva ) and niece of Theresa Donovan ( Jen Lilley ) .
Following her death , it is revealed she is the daughter of Eduardo Hernandez making her the sister of Rafe Hernandez , Arianna Hernandez , Dario Hernandez and Gabi Hernandez , and an aunt of Arianna Horton .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
In February 2014 , Soap Opera Digest announced that model True O'Brien had been cast as Paige Larson on the series .
O'Brien made her first on - screen debut on March 3 , 2014 .
About her audition , O'Brien said " It was an intense process .
It was the first time I had really tested for anything .
I did n't know what was going on , so I just let it happen .
When I walked out of there , I felt good .
I was very thankful to have had that opportunity to even experience something like that . "
In June 2015 , it was confirmed that O'Brien was let go from the series , she exited on September 9 , 2015 when her character was the second to be killed off as part of the Necktie Killer storyline to commemorate with the show 's 50th anniversary .
O'Brien returned in flashbacks on September 28 , when Paige 's death scene was shown and in her mother 's visions on October 2 , 2015 .
In October 2017 , O'Brien reprises the role of Paige as part of special dream - sequence episode on October 31 , 2017 .
STORYLINES BACKGROUND Section::::Storylines .
Section::::Background .
Paige was born on May 29 , 1995 and would grew up with her single mother Eve Donovan .
Her father would later be revealed to be Eduardo Hernandez , aka Eddie Larson ; which makes Rafe , Arianna , Dario and Gabi her half - siblings . 2014 - 15 Section::::2014 - 15 .
In early 2014 , Paige Larson arrives in Salem without her mother , Eve Donovan ( Kassie DePaiva ) and quickly develops a connection to JJ Deveraux ( Casey Moss ) .
Upon Eve 's arrival back to Salem , Paige 's relationship with J.J. begins to hit a hard spot , ultimately ending with them parting ways multiples times .
She becomes close to another guy , Cole Hines ( Riley Bodenstab ) and asks him out on a date , which he accepts .
After their date , Paige meets up with J.J. at the park , where he apologizes profusely and asks for a second chance .
She forgives him , leading them to reconcile .
Cole finds her at the park watching Parker play and tells her that J.J. will hurt her and that she deserves better , but when he sees that she 's not listening to him , he leaves .
He then works with her mother Eve to break J.J. and Paige up .
Cole plants drugs in J.J. 's backpack to frame him .
When Paige realizes what Cole has done , she angrily confronts him .
At first he denies the accusations , but then Cole tells her how amazing she is and that she deserves better .
Paige tells him to stay away from her and J.J. before leaving .
Paige would find out that her mother and J.J. had an affair and Jennifer Horton knew about it
and she confronts him at her surprise nineteenth birthday party , on May 21 .
She becomes very cynical and wants nothing to do with them .
Paige begins a relationship with Kyle to make J.J. jealous , not knowing that he is a drug dealer and that J.J. works for him ; however , the relationship would later end .
Paige and J.J. begin to reconnect the following month .
She becomes a witness to the Chad and Serena fight and would reveal what she saw , since Serena would later be found murdered .
Since they become close again , Paige is the first person J.J. tells about the Clyde / drug ring and was sworn not to involve the police .
In early September , she would retell what she saw to Rafe and exchanges words with Chad , who does n't remember what happened after the fight , and calls J.J. afterward ; Paige had something to tell him , however , when J.J. arrives at her dorm , he finds her in the shower with a tie loosely around her neck .
Paige is pronounced dead , much to the horror of J.J. and Eve who apologizes to Paige over her body .
Chad DiMera is seen as the prime suspect , due to the fact that a flower found near the crime scene can only be found at the DiMera mansion ; following the arrest of Chad , he was released after Aiden Jennings was believed to be the Neck Tie Killer .
In December 2015 , Ben Rogers was arrested for the string of murders , following a statement by Abigail Deveraux .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Soapcentral.com
Who 's Who in Salem Paige Larson