EMBASSY OF THE UNITED STATES , HAVANA
The Embassy of the United States of America in Havana is the United States of America 's diplomatic mission in Cuba .
On January 3 , 1961 , US President Dwight D. Eisenhower severed relations following the Cuban Revolution of the 1950s .
In 1977 , President Jimmy Carter and President Fidel Castro signed an Interests Sections Agreement that permitted each government to operate out of its former embassy in Havana and Washington D.C. , which were called Interests Sections ; they were prohibited from flying their respective flags .
Cuban President Raúl Castro and US President Barack Obama restored full diplomatic connections on July 20 , 2015 .
The building housed the United States Interests Section in Havana between 1977 and 2015 , which operated under the auspices of the Swiss Embassy ( acting as protecting power ) .
On July 1 , 2015 it was announced that with the resumption of diplomatic ties , the building resumed its role as the U.S. Embassy in Cuba on July 20 , 2015 .
The embassy is led by Chargé d'affaires ad interim Ambassador Mara Tekach .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The current embassy was designed in the Modernist — Brutalist style by the architectural firm Harrison & Abramovitz .
It is a long and six - story concrete and glass building , completed in 1953 .
The gardens were designed by Californian landscape architect Thomas Dolliver Church .
The contractor for the building was Jaime Alberto Mitrani , PE , also a professor of civil engineering at the University of Havana .
The embassy complex is located directly on the Malecón and the José Martí Anti - Imperialist Platform , in proximity to the Cuban Ministry of Foreign Affairs .
After the U.S. diplomatic mission became defunct in 1961 , the building was not used by American personnel until the opening of the interests section on September 1 , 1977 .
In 1963 , Prime Minister of Cuba Fidel Castro ordered the confiscation of the complex , but action was never taken by the Cuban government , though it still claimed right to the property in 2012 .
During the period that the complex served as an interests section , the U.S. was represented by Switzerland , and the Swiss maintained both the embassy complex and its effects .
Renovations were completed on the complex in 1997 .
The building was upgraded from an interests section and returned to its original role as the United States Embassy in Cuba , on July 20 , 2015 .
On August 14 , 2015 , U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry officially reopened it ; eight congressional lawmakers involved in the policy change attended , and the three Marines ( Larry C. Morris , Mike East and Jim Tracy ) who had lowered the U.S. flag at the embassy 54 years earlier presented a new flag , which was then raised by Marines assigned to the post .
HEALTH - RELATED INCIDENTS Section::::Health - related incidents .
In August 2017 , reports began surfacing that Americans posted at the embassy had been subjected to health - related incidents , dating back to late 2016 .
Two dozen employees of the State Department reported experiencing what were referred to as " health attacks " .
The State Department determined that the health problems may have been the result of an attack or else exposure to an as - yet - unknown device , and did not believe the Cuban government is responsible .
Affected individuals described mild brain damage similar to a concussion and symptoms such as temporary or permanent hearing loss , memory loss , and nausea .
Speculation has centered around a sonic or ultrasonic weapon , however the scientific consensus is that the use of a sonic weapon is implausible .
Dr. Timothy Leighton has said " If you 're talking about a ray - gun rifle knocking out someone with ultrasound they ca n't hear at a hundred meters — that 's not going to happen " .
The United States expelled two Cuban diplomats in response to the attacks ; the Cuban government offered to cooperate with the US in an investigation of the incidents .
In September , the US State Department stated that it was removing non - emergency staff from the US embassy , and warned US citizens not to travel to Cuba .
In October 2017 , the Associated Press released what it claimed was a recording of the sound some embassy workers heard during the attacks .
However , senior neurologists consulted by The Guardian suggested that the health incidents were probably psychosomatic complaints , of the kind commonly known as mass hysteria .
In December 2017 , investigators discovered abnormalities in the victims ' brains .
The white matter of the brains showed physical changes which doctors believe could not have been caused by sound .
They are now avoiding the term " sonic " to describe the attacks and there is growing skepticism it was caused by a sonic device ; rather , it 's possible that the sound heard by victims was a by - product of the brain damage .
James Lewis , a former State Department official and intelligence expert , stated : " We know with 100 % certainly that the embassies are under surveillance , and the technology being used could just be crude and over - powered " ; he noted that health problems at the US embassy in Moscow in the 1970s were thought to be linked to the use of microwave surveillance devices .
SEE ALSO * Embassy of Cuba in Washington ,
D.C. * Cuban Thaw * Canadian Embassy in Havana NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* United States Department of State :
Cuba
* Embassy of the United States in Cuba ( Havana )