FIFTY SHADES DARKER
Fifty Shades Darker is a 2012 erotic romance novel by British author E. L. James .
It is the second installment in the Fifty Shades trilogy that traces the deepening relationship between a college graduate , Anastasia Steele , and a young business magnate , Christian Grey .
The first and third volumes , Fifty Shades of Grey and Fifty Shades Freed , were published in 2011 and 2012 , respectively .
The novel is published by Vintage Books and reached No . 1 on the USA Today best seller list .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Three days after leaving Christian , Anastasia " Ana " Steele begins her job as personal assistant to Jack Hyde , an editor at Seattle Independent Publishing ( SIP ) .
He asks Ana out often which , though it makes her uneasy , she writes off .
Later , Christian emails her about a gallery exhibit José Rodriguez started in Portland , which she 'd forgotten .
Ana and Christian attend the show together and kiss in an alley .
The next day , they have lunch in a restaurant and Christian reveals he wants her any way possible .
He later asks that they resume their relationship but under Ana 's conditions : no rules and no punishments .
She agrees .
Christian reveals to Ana that he bought SIP but that the deal must stay secret for another month .
Feeling he is interfering in her career , especially after he freezes the company 's accounts preventing her from going on an overnight business trip to New York with Jack , Ana finds it annoying .
Christian insists his actions were for her own protection because Jack is a " known philanderer " who has apparently harassed his last five assistants .
Christian 's concerns prove correct when Jack corners Ana after hours and blackmails her , demanding sexual favors .
Ana escapes using her self - defense training , and Christian has Jack fired and confiscates his work computer .
Meanwhile , when attending a masquerade ball at the home of Christian 's parents , Ana meets Elena Lincoln ( whom Ana nicknames Mrs. Robinson ) and discovers that Elena and Christian own a salon business together .
Later , Ana is auctioned off and Christian bids $ 100,000 for the first dance with her .
Ana is disgusted to learn Christian continues to be friends with Elena , the woman who seduced him when he was only 15 years old and introduced him to the BDSM lifestyle .
When Elena realizes that Christian sees Ana as a girlfriend and not a submissive , she becomes antagonistic towards Ana , trying to sow discord in the budding relationship .
Meanwhile , Ana is stalked at work by a disturbed Leila Williams , one of Christian 's former submissives , a situation made more intense
when Ana learns Leila has a gun .
Leila 's obsession with Christian and Ana began after she left her husband four months before , leading to a mental breakdown .
Leila breaks into Ana 's apartment and threatens her at gunpoint .
Christian defuses the situation by using their dominant / submissive dynamic , leaving Ana worried that Christian can not be satisfied with a vanilla relationship .
Ana confronts Christian about Leila .
Fearing Ana is leaving him again , Christian impulsively puts out his marriage proposal .
Ana does not answer , claiming she needs time to consider it .
José , who Christian still views as a romantic rival , drives to Seattle to visit Ana , which Christian only permits if they both stay at Escala .
Ana becomes worried on the night before Christian 's 28th birthday when he goes missing flying from Portland to Seattle in his helicopter with Ros Bailey .
However , he eventually makes it back to Escala safely , explaining that both the helicopter 's engines failed ; sabotage is suspected .
Ana realizes she never wants to be without him and accepts his marriage proposal .
The next day , the Grey family throws Christian a large birthday party at their mansion .
Ana 's friend Kate worries after finding an email between Ana and Christian , discussing the BDSM Contract , but Ana assures her that her relationship with Christian is a vanilla one .
After Christian and Ana announce their engagement , Elena angrily confronts Ana , accusing her of being a gold - digger and claiming that a vanilla relationship will never satisfy Christian .
Enraged , Ana throws her drink at Elena and tells her to mind her own business .
As they fight , Christian comes in and confronts Elena .
He reminds her that while she taught him how to take control of his own life , Elena never once taught him to love like Ana did .
Christian 's adoptive mother , Grace , overhears the argument and is furious that Elena preyed on her teenage son .
After slapping her across the face , Grace rails on Elena for her actions and orders her out of her family 's life for good .
She leaves in disgrace and Grace confronts Christian about it .
After telling Grace the whole story , he decides to end his business relationship with Elena and give back the salon to her .
Christian takes Ana to the boathouse , which has been decorated with flowers and soft lights .
He proposes properly with a ring and Ana accepts .
Outside the Greys ' mansion , Jack Hyde secretly watches the party ; he is the one who sabotaged Christian 's helicopter and he has sworn revenge .
CHARACTERS RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The novel reached No . 2 on the USA Today best seller list and is considered by The Guardian to be No . 11 on the Top 100 Bestselling Books of All Time in the United Kingdom .
FILM ADAPTATION Section::::Film adaptation .
In March 2014 , the producer for the eponymous film adaptation of Fifty Shades of Grey , Dana Brunetti , had said there were , as of then , no solid plans to make a sequel .
That film was released on 13 February 2015 .
Before the first film premiered , there was still high anticipation from fans for the sequel to the film .
After the first film premiered at a special fan screening in New York City on 6 February 2015 , director Sam Taylor - Johnson confirmed two sequels to be succeeded after the first film , with Fifty Shades Darker to be released in 2016 .
Principal photography commenced in June 2015 in Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada .
In April 2015 , at the Universal CinemaCon in Las Vegas , Universal announced the release dates of the film along with its sequel .
The film is scheduled to be released on 10 February 2017 .
The first still from the film was released on Friday , 24 April 2015 , showing Jamie Dornan as Christian Grey in a black mask looking into a mirror .
In April 2015 , Universal Pictures chairman Donna Langley told The Hollywood Reporter that the second instalment will be " more of a thriller " .
In November 2015 , Universal Studios announced that both films will be shot back - to - back with principal photography scheduled to commence in early 2016 .
Filming began in Canada on 9 February 2016 and continued through 12 July 2016 .
On 28 January 2016 , producer Charolette McKinney broke ground on the new project , and it was announced that Kim Basinger would play Elena Lincoln .
SEE ALSO * BDSM in culture and media
* Sadism and masochism in fiction REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Official author page