BERT AND ERNIE Bert and Ernie are two puppets who appear together in numerous skits on the popular U.S. children 's television show Sesame Street .
Originated by Frank Oz and Jim Henson , the characters are currently performed by puppeteers Eric Jacobson and Peter Linz and also Ann Chancellor ; Oz occasionally performs Bert .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Bert and Ernie were built by Don Sahlin from a simple design scribbled by Jim Henson , creator of The Muppets .
Initially , Henson performed Bert and Oz performed Ernie , but after just one day of rehearsal , they switched characters .
The original idea was to show that even though two people can have totally different characteristics , they can still be good friends .
According to writer Jon Stone , the relationship between Bert and Ernie reflected the real - life friendship between Henson and Oz .
Their names are believed to have been drawn from those of two minor characters in the Frank Capra film
It 's A Wonderful Life .
According to A&E 's Biography , Bert and Ernie were virtually the only Muppets to appear in the Sesame Street pilot episode , which was screen tested to a number of families in July 1969 .
Their brief appearance was the only part of the pilot that tested well , so it was decided that not only should Muppet characters be the " stars " of the show , but would also interact with the human characters , something that was not done in the pilot .
An ordinary Bert and Ernie sketch involves Ernie coming up with a harebrained idea , and Bert trying to talk him out of it , ending with Bert losing his temper and Ernie remaining unaware of the results of his own bad idea .
For example , in one sketch , Ernie tells Bert he started to collect ice cubes the day before , and put them under the electric blanket overnight .
When he shows the ice cubes to Bert , he finds out that they have melted into water .
Bert knows what has happened , and tries to tell Ernie that his ice cubes melted because of the electric blanket , but Ernie takes this to mean that a fish from the ocean came into the apartment and melted his ice cubes , and vows to find the ( non - existent ) fish that melted them , leading Bert , just after Ernie has run out of their apartment after the fish , to murmur sardonically , " Go get him , Ernie . "
The age of the characters is unclear .
Sesame Street Live performer Taylor Morgan said in an interview that " I just kind of try to think like a six year old or a seven year old , because that 's how old Bert is . "
BERT Section::::Bert .
Bert was initially performed by Frank Oz .
Since 2001 , Muppeteer Eric Jacobson has been phased in as Bert 's primary performer after Oz retired from most of his Muppet duties to focus on directing ( Oz , however , did continue to perform the character occasionally ) .
Bert is a " hand rod puppet " , which means that while the puppeteer 's right arm is inserted into Bert 's head to control the mouth , the puppeteer 's left hand uses rods to control the arms of the puppet .
Bert has one large eyebrow .
ERNIE Section::::Ernie .
Ernie was originally performed by Jim Henson .
From 1993 to 2014 , Muppeteer Steve Whitmire took on the role of Ernie ( following the death of Henson in 1990 ) .
In 2014 , Billy Barkhurst took on the role of Ernie ; currently , the character is performed by Peter Linz .
Ernie is a " live hand puppet " , meaning that while operating the head of the puppet with his right hand , the puppeteer inserts his left hand into a T shaped sleeve , capped off with a glove that matches the fabric " skin " of the puppet , thus " becoming " the left arm of the puppet .
A second puppeteer usually provides the right arm .
Ernie 's performance of " Rubber Duckie , " wherein he sings affectionately about his squeaking toy duck and the joy it brings him during bath time , became a modest mainstream hit , reaching No . 16 on the Billboard Hot 100 in September 1970 .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
Bert and Ernie are among a handful of Sesame Street specific Muppets to also appear on The Muppet Show , making occasional cameo appearances , such as at the end of The Muppets Valentine Show , the 1974 pilot episode for the series .
While several other Muppets featured on Sesame Street such as Kermit the Frog would crossover into the other program , Bert and Ernie were primarily confined to the occasional cameo .
SEXUAL ORIENTATION
DISCUSSION
Section::::Sexual orientation discussion .
Bert and Ernie live together in an apartment located in the basement of 123 Sesame Street .
Despite sleeping in separate beds , they share the same bedroom , which has led to some speculation that they are a representation of gay lovers .
This is repeatedly denied by Sesame Workshop , and some of Bert 's interactions with female characters do appear to show that he is attracted to women , like serenading Connie Stevens in the Some Enchanted Evening segment of a first - season episode of The Muppet Show , and recording a song about his girlfriend , I Want to Hold Your Ear , which was released on several albums .
In September 2018 , Mark Saltzman , one of the script and songwriters for Sesame Street , alleged in an interview with Queerty that Bert and Ernie were analogues for his own intimate relationship with film editor Arnold Glassman , with whom he had been together for over twenty years , despite the fact that he did not begin writing for Sesame Street till fifteen years after Bert 's and Ernie 's first appearances .
Sesame Workshop responded by claiming that Bert and Ernie have no sexual orientations because they are both puppets .
Frank Oz , who previously performed as Bert , stated Bert and Ernie were not gay , saying , " They 're not , of course [ a gay couple ] .
But why that question ?
Does it really matter ?
Why the need to define people as only gay ?
There 's much more to a human being than just straightness or gayness . "
But despite Sesame Workshop 's repeated denials and disclaimers of the notion , the idea of Bert and Ernie as a gay couple is sufficiently widespread that it has been used as the basis of jokes on the shows Saturday Night Live , American Dad ! , Modern Family , The Simpsons , Friends , 2DTV , My Wife and Kids , The Middle , Family Guy , and Supernatural .
Sportscaster Jim Rome has received e mails and phone calls from listeners to his radio program on the subject , and has expressed disgust with all of them .
More recently , The New Yorker magazine chose an image of Bert and Ernie by artist Jack Hunter , titled Moment of Joy , as the cover of their July 8 , 2013 publication , which covers the Supreme Court decisions on the Defense of Marriage Act and California 's Proposition 8 .
Sesame Workshop was reportedly so outraged by the idea that it was rumored to be considering the possibility of litigation .
PARODY AND OTHER USES Section::::Parody and other uses .
From March 30 , 1997 , to ca .
2002 , the parody website " Bert is Evil " displayed Bert in a number of doctored photographs , implicating him in crimes ranging from the Assassination of John F. Kennedy to those of Jack the Ripper .
A similar image from another source and featuring Bert conferring with Osama bin Laden was mistakenly included by a Bangladeshi print shop on a series of protest signs in October 2001 and 2002 .
The German comedy sketch series Freitag Nacht News had a recurring sketch called Bernie und Ert created by Attik Kargar , who performed the puppets and supplied the voice of Bernie .
Bernie and Ert are an obscene parody of Ernie and Bert , and especially redubbed on Sesamstrasse .
The puppets had no nose , one eye each , and swapped hairstyles .
Each sketch focused on such topics as crime , drug abuse and Friday the 13th .
In February 2003 , Bernie and Ert were dropped from the series because of legal concerns ; however , older episodes circulate on the internet .
They also appeared in a Freitag Nacht News sequence called Bullzeye in a sketch called " Popo Club " .
Bernie & Ert wore black masks and leather jackets , disguised as Unknown No . 1 and Unknown No . 2 respectively , with another character named Winfred , propagating bizarre sexual practices .
This skit became popular that it resulted in more skits called " Popo Club " featuring Unknown No . 1 & 2 , with occasional appearances by Winfred .
The film
It 's a Wonderful Life ( 1946 )
includes a taxi driver named Ernie and a policeman named Bert .
Jerry Juhl , a writer on many Henson projects , said that the film did not influence the creation of these two Muppets : " Despite his many talents , Jim had no memory for details like this .
He knew the movie , of course , but would not have remembered the police officer and the cabdriver . "
The Sesame Street special Elmo Saves Christmas refers to the coincidence : in the special , It 's a Wonderful Life plays on television continuously and , near the end , the Muppets Bert and Ernie walk by the television set and stop short when they hear their names mentioned in the movie .
In April 2013 , a pair of high energy neutrinos detected at the IceCube Neutrino Observatory , possibly of extragalactic origin , were nicknamed " Bert " and " Ernie " .
The British soap opera EastEnders has confirmed that characters Bert and Ernie Moon are named after the Muppets .
INTERNATIONALLY * Arab World , Iftah Ya Simsim , Bert is " Badr " , and Ernie is " Anis " .
They are called " Anis w Badr " ( ) * Brazil , Vila Sésamo , Bert is " Beto " , and Ernie is " Ênio " .
They 're called " Ênio e Beto " .
* Egypt , Alam Simsim , Bert is " Hadi " , and Ernie is Shadi .
They are known as " Shadi w Hadi " .
* France , 1 , Rue Sésame , Bert is " Bart " and Ernie is " Ernest " .
They are called " Ernest et Bart " .
In the French version , when Bert 's brother Bart comes to visit , he is called " Bert " .
* Germany , Sesamstraße , they are called " Ernie und Bert " .
* India , Galli Galli Sim Sim , they are called Bert and Ernie .
* Israel , Rechov Sumsum , Bert is " Bentz " , a common short - form for the name " Ben - Tzion " , and Ernie is " Arik " , short - form for " Ariel " ( ) .
* Italy , " Sesamo apriti " , Bert is " Berto " and Ernie is " Ernesto " .
They are called " Ernesto e Berto " .
* Mexico and all Latin America , Plaza Sésamo , Bert is " Beto " , while Ernie is " Enrique " .
In addition , Ernie 's cousin Ernestine is called " Enriqueta " .
* Netherlands , Sesamstraat
they are " Bert en Ernie " .
Paul Haenen provides Bert 's voice , and Wim T. Schippers provides Ernie 's .
* Norway , Sesam Stasjon , Bert is " Bernt " , while Ernie is " Erling " .
Usually , they 're called " Bernt og Erling " , respectively voiced by Harald Mæle and Magnus Nielsen .
* Pakistan , Khul Ja Sim Sim , Bert is " Bablu " , while Ernie is " Annu " .
They are commonly called " Annu aur Bablu " .
* Poland , Ulica Sezamkowa , Bert is " Hubert " and Ernie is " Emil " .
They are called " Hubert i Emil " .
* Portugal , Rua Sésamo , Bert is " Becas " and Ernie is " Egas " .
They are called " Egas e Becas " , in the opposite order .
* Russia , Ulitsa Sezam , Bert is Vlas and Ernie is Yenik .
They are called Vlas i Yenik ( " Влас и Еник " )
* Spain , Barrio Sésamo , Bert is " Blas " , and Ernie is " Epi " .
Also , they are always called " Epi y Blas " , in the opposite order .
* Turkey , Susam Sokağı , Bert is " Büdü " , while Ernie is " Edi " .
They are commonly called " Edi ile Büdü " .
SEE ALSO REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Sesame Street at PBS Kids
* Sesame
Workshop * Tough Pigs Anthology Transcripts of Bert and Ernie sketches