LONDON HAS FALLEN
London
Has Fallen is a 2016 American action thriller film directed by Babak Najafi and written by Creighton Rothenberger , Katrin Benedikt , Chad St. John and Christian Gudegast .
It is a sequel to Antoine Fuqua 's 2013 film Olympus
Has Fallen and stars Gerard Butler , Aaron Eckhart and Morgan Freeman , with Alon Moni Aboutboul , Angela Bassett , Robert Forster , Jackie Earle Haley , Melissa Leo , Radha Mitchell , Sean O'Bryan , Waleed Zuaiter and Charlotte Riley in supporting roles .
Filming began in London on October 24 , 2014 .
A Christmas break started in November with filming resuming in February 2015 .
The film was released by Focus Features under their recently revived Gramercy Pictures label on March 4 , 2016 , and grossed $ 205 million worldwide .
However , the critical reception was generally negative , with Variety accusing it of fear - mongering and " terrorsploitation " while The A.V. Club named it worst film of the year .
A third film , titled Angel Has Fallen , is in development and has started filming in 2018 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Western intelligence services of the G8 track down Pakistani arms dealer Aamir Barkawi ( Alon Moni Aboutboul ) as the mastermind behind several terrorist attacks , and authorize an American drone strike on Barkawi 's compound , apparently killing Barkawi and his family .
Two years later , UK Prime Minister James Wilson suddenly dies , and arrangements are made for the Western world leaders to attend his funeral in London .
Secret Service Director Lynne Jacobs ( Angela Bassett ) assigns agent Mike Banning ( Gerard Butler ) , a close friend of U.S. President Benjamin Asher ( Aaron Eckhart ) , to lead Asher 's security detail while overseas , even though Banning 's wife Leah ( Radha Mitchell ) is due to give birth to their child in a few weeks .
The entourage arrives via Air Force One at Stansted Airport , and Banning pushes their arrival at Somerset House in London via Marine One to earlier .
As Asher 's Presidential State Car arrives at St Paul 's Cathedral , a series of coordinated attacks by terrorists disguised as Metropolitan Police , the Queen 's Guardsmen , and other first responders erupts , killing the other Western leaders , damaging or destroying major landmarks and generating mass panic .
Asher 's early arrival has thrown the attack on him at St. Paul 's off - guard , and Banning is able to rescue Asher and Jacobs and rushes them back to Marine One .
As the helicopter and its escorts takes off , terrorists fire Stinger missiles at them , destroying the escorts and forcing the damaged helicopter to crash - land in Hyde Park .
Banning and Asher suffer only minor wounds , but Jacobs is fatally injured , and she makes Banning promise to stay alive for his unborn child and get back at whoever did this .
Banning quickly escorts Asher into the London Underground as the city 's power is lost and people take shelter in their homes .
In Washington , D.C. , U.S. Vice President Allan Trumbull ( Morgan Freeman ) works with the British authorities to investigate the incident while trying to track down the President .
Trumbull receives a call from Barkawi , still alive after all and operating out of Yemen .
The man takes responsibility for the attacks , coordinated by his son Kamran ( Waleed Zuaiter ) .
Barkawi purposely had Wilson poisoned to lure the Western leaders to London to attack them .
Barkawi knows Asher is still alive , and promises that if Kamran captures him , he will broadcast the execution of the President on the Internet .
Trumbull orders his intelligence staff to locate Barkawi 's known operatives to find any connection to the attack , while British authorities have all first responders stand down , so that any left in the open can be identified as terrorists .
After leaving a sign to be picked up by satellite tracking , Banning leads Asher to an MI6 safe - house , where Jacqueline " Jax " Marshall ( Charlotte Riley ) briefs them on what their intelligence has learned .
Marshall receives a voice message from Trumbull that confirms they saw Banning 's sign and that an extraction team is en route .
Security monitors show the approach of a Delta Force team , but Banning suspects they have arrived far too soon and may be more terrorists .
He covers and fights off the terrorists before Asher and Banning drive away , but their car is struck by a truck driven by terrorists , allowing them to kidnap Asher .
Banning is rescued by the extraction team , a combined Delta Force / S.A.S. squad .
They also suspect that there is a mole in the British government .
Trumbull 's staff have identified a building in London owned by one of Barkawi 's companies , which still appears to be drawing massive amounts of power despite supposedly being under construction and unoccupied , and suspect it is Kamran 's headquarters .
Banning joins the extraction team to infiltrate the building and stop Kamran before he can kill Asher .
Banning and Asher escape just before the building is destroyed by the Delta Force / SAS squad , killing Kamran and the remaining terrorists .
Marshall has worked with British authorities to restore London 's security system and , discovering that MI5 Intelligence Chief John Lancaster ( Patrick Kennedy ) aided in Barkawi 's attack , she kills him .
Meanwhile , Trumbull contacts Barkawi to tell him that his plan failed , and then to look outside , moments before the building is destroyed by another drone strike , killing him .
Two weeks after the attack on London , Banning is home spending time with Leah and their newborn child , named Lynne after his deceased boss .
He sits in front of his laptop and contemplates sending his letter of resignation .
On TV , Trumbull speaks regarding the recent events , leaving an inspiring message that the U.S. will prevail .
This convinces Banning to delete the letter .
CAST * Gerard Butler as Secret Service Agent Mike
Banning
* Aaron Eckhart as US President Benjamin Asher
* Morgan Freeman as US Vice President Allan Trumbull
* Alon Moni Aboutboul as Aamir Barkawi , an arms dealer and terrorist mastermind who is No . 6 on the FBI 's 10 Most Wanted list .
* Angela Bassett as Secret Service Director Lynne Jacobs
* Robert Forster as US Army General Edward Clegg , Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff .
* Melissa Leo as Secretary of Defense Ruth McMillan
* Radha Mitchell as Leah Banning , Mike 's wife .
* Charlotte Riley as MI6 Agent
Jacqueline " Jax " Marshall * Jackie Earle Haley as White House Deputy Chief of Staff DC Mason * Sean O'Bryan as
NSA Deputy Director Ray Monroe
* Waleed Zuaiter as Kamran Barkawi , Aamir 's son and sub - commander * Mehdi Dehbi as Sultan Mansoor , the terrorist hacker
* Colin Salmon as Commissioner Kevin Hazard , head of the Metropolitan Police * Patrick Kennedy as
MI5 Counter - Intelligence Chief John Lancaster * Bryan Larkin as SAS Captain Will Davies * Adel Bencherif as Raza Mansoor , Sultan 's brother and a terrorist * Michael Wildman as Secret Service Agent Voight * Andrew Pleavin as Secret Service Agent Bronson * Deborah Grant as Doris , Leah 's mother
* Clarkson Guy Williams as British Prime Minister Leighton Clarkson * Penny Downie as Home Secretary Rose Kenter
* Philip Delancy as French President Jacques Mainard
* Alex Giannini as Italian Prime Minister Antonio Gusto .
It was Giannini 's last movie role before his death in October 2 , 2015 .
* Elsa Mollien as Mrs Viviana Gusto
* Nancy Baldwin as German Chancellor Agnes Bruckner
* Nigel Whitmey as Canadian Prime Minister Robert Bowman * Julia Montgomery Brown as Mrs Bowman * Tsuwayuki Saotome as Japanese Prime Minister Tsutomu Nakushima
PRODUCTION
CASTING
Section::::Production .
Section::::Casting .
Butler , Eckhart , Freeman , Bassett , Leo , Forster and Mitchell reprised their roles from Olympus Has Fallen .
Production had been scheduled to begin in May 2015 in London , with Creighton Rothenberger and Katrin Benedikt returning to write the script .
Director Antoine Fuqua , however , did not return , due to his commitments with The Equalizer .
On May 1 , 2014 , it was announced Focus Features had acquired distribution rights to the sequel , and would release the film on October 2 , 2015 .
On August 18 , 2014 , it was announced that Charlie Countryman director Fredrik Bond would take over direction from Fuqua , but Bond left the film on September 18 , six weeks before the shooting was to begin .
On September 28 , director Babak Najafi signed on to direct the film .
On October 10 , Jackie Earle Haley joined the film to play Deputy Chief Mason .
On November 12 , Mehdi Dehbi joined the film to play Sultan Mansoor , the youngest of three brothers whose life has been forever changed after a drone strike .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography began on October 24 , 2014 , in London .
Four weeks of shooting were to take place , involving actors Freeman , Eckhart , Bassett and Melissa Leo , before a break for Christmas .
Gerard Butler - who had been filming Geostorm the previous October - joined the shoot later , filming scenes with Eckhart in March 2015 .
A helicopter was seen making a landing in the courtyard of Somerset House .
Butler and Angela Bassett were seen filming in Somerset House .
Butler stated in an interview that the movie was also filmed in India and was to continue in Bulgaria .
Then President of Bulgaria , Rosen Plevneliev , visited the set of London Has Fallen during filming at Boyana Cinema Center in Bulgaria .
Filming lasted through April 2015 .
SCORE
Section::::Score .
The music was composed and conducted by Trevor Morris , who provided the score for the first film .
The record was released on March 4 , 2016 , by Back Lot Music .
The score was recorded at Abbey Road Studios with The Chamber Orchestra of London .
All music composed by Trevor Morris RELEASE Section::::Release .
On May 20 , 2015 , Focus Features relaunched their Gramercy Pictures label for action , horror , and science fiction releases , with London Has Fallen being one of Gramercy 's first titles .
The film was planned for an October 2 , 2015 , release , however , on June 12 , 2015 , it was announced that the film had been moved back to January 22 , 2016 , to avoid competition with The Martian , which swapped its original November 25 release date with Victor Frankenstein .
On July 1 , 2015 , the film 's teaser trailer was released .
The timing of the release was criticized as " insensitive " by the Chair of the Tavistock Square Memorial Trust , Philip Nelson , as it coincided with the week of the 10th anniversary of the 7 July 2005 London bombings , in which 52 people were killed , and with the 2015 Sousse attacks , in which 30 British nationals were killed .
On September 16 , 2015 , the film 's release was moved back again to March 4 , 2016 , because the studios needed more time to finish the film 's visual effects .
The U.S. trailer was released on November 5 , 2015 .
A new theatrical poster of the film was released on January 21 , 2016 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
London Has Fallen was released on Blu - ray and DVD on June 14 , 2016 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
London Has Fallen grossed $ 62.7 million in North America and $ 143.2 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 205.9 million , against a budget of $ 60 million .
The film outgrossed its predecessor 's total of $ 170 million .
In the United States and Canada , pre - release tracking suggested the film would gross $ 20–23 million from 3,490 theaters in its opening weekend , trailing fellow newcomer Zootopia ( $ 60–70 million projection ) but besting Whiskey Tango Foxtrot ( $ 10–12 million projection ) .
The film made $ 850,000 from its Thursday night previews and $ 7.6 million on its first day .
It went on to gross $ 21.6 million in its opening weekend , finishing second at the box office behind Zootopia ( $ 75 million ) .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 25 % based on 181 reviews , with an average rating of 3.9/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads ,
" London Has Fallen traps a talented cast – and all who dare to see it – in a mid-1990s basic - cable nightmare of a film loaded with xenophobia , and threadbare action - thriller clichés .
"
On Metacritic , the film has a score of 28 out of 100 , based on reviews from 35 critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A – " on an A+ to F scale , the same score as the first film .
Ignatiy Vishnevetsky of The A.V. Club wrote : " A murky , brain - dead stab - a - thon packed with so many inane chases , laughable special effects , and mismatched stock footage shots that it begs to be made into a drinking game , London Has Fallen is one of those rare films that is good at absolutely nothing . "
The A.V. Club later picked it as their worst movie of the year .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
Variety described London Has Fallen as " effortlessly racist " invoking " familiar Islamophobia " , a " terrorsploitation " fantasy designed to spread fear after the November 2015 Paris attacks , and " ugly , reactionary fear - mongering . "
Meanwhile , The Hollywood Reporter ( THR ) styled it as " major world capitals destruction porn sub - genre " that feeds a " paranoia " .
The film has been called " extremely insensitive " by families of the victims of the 7/7 bombings after an early trailer was released ahead of the 10th anniversary of the attacks .
SEQUEL
Section::::Sequel .
On October 26 , 2016 , it was announced that a sequel titled Angel Has Fallen is in development , with Gerard Butler reprising his role , as well as once again acting as a producer on the film .
On July 25 , 2017 , Ric Roman Waugh was announced as director for Angel Has Fallen .
On January 10 , 2018 , Holt McCallany joined the cast as Wade Jennings , an ex - military turned head of a technology company .
On January 18 , 2018 , Jada Pinkett Smith and Tim Blake Nelson are confirmed to appear in Angel Has Fallen and the filming of it is set to start on February 7 , 2018 .
On February 13 , 2018 , Piper Perabo joined the cast .
Angel Has Fallen has started filming in Virginia Water Lake .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS