THE WALKING DEAD : A NEW FRONTIER
The Walking Dead :
A New Frontier ( also known as The Walking Dead : Season Three ) is an episodic graphic adventure game based on Robert Kirkman 's The Walking Dead comic book series developed by Telltale Games .
It is Telltale 's third season of its The Walking Dead series , with the first two episodes released on December 20 , 2016 , and a retail season pass disc edition released on February 7 , 2017 .
The game employs the same narrative structure as the past seasons , where player choice in one episode will have a permanent impact on future story elements .
The player choices recorded in save files from the first two seasons and the additional episode " 400 Days " carry over into the third season .
Clementine ( voiced by Melissa Hutchison ) , who was the player 's companion during the first season and the player - character in season two returns as a player - character along with another player - character , Javier " Javi " Garcia ( voiced by Jeff Schine ) .
The game takes place in the same fictional world as the comic , with the zombie apocalypse having occurred .
The main characters of the game are original characters ; however , due to time skips in season two and between seasons two and three , the timeline is caught up to where the comics are .
Telltale Games announced a fourth and final season titled that was released in August 2018 .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
Similar to the previous seasons , The Walking Dead : A New Frontier is a point - and - click adventure game .
In contrast to previous seasons , there will be two playable characters : Clementine , the heroine from the previous games ; and Javier , a new character introduced this season .
Players can direct the current character under their control around the environment , examine and interact with various scenery elements and collect and use objects to advance the story .
The player can also initiate conversations with non - player characters via conversation trees .
Certain replies from other characters may offer the player multiple choices to select from , including the option to stay silent , with a limited amount of time to make the selection ; if the player does not select an option , the conversation will continue as if they had stayed quiet .
Such choices can affect how the other characters will later react to the player - character which can influence later events in the story .
Other scenes are more action - oriented , requiring the player to complete quick time events to prevent the player - character or their allies from getting killed .
If the player fails these events , the game will restart at the start of such scenes .
Such action scenes may also require the player to make a key decision within a limited time frame , such as which of two characters to save from attacking walkers .
The player 's choices and actions will impact story elements in later episodes ; for example , a character that the player does not choose to be saved will not appear in later scenes .
A New Frontier will incorporate player choices made in previous games in the series through existing save files ; Telltale states they will offer multiple options for how players can bring in previous saves into the game , including for players that have switched their choice of platform prior to A New Frontier .
A New Frontier will not be released on the PlayStation 3 or Xbox 360 , but players that have saves from Season Two on these platforms will be able to download a patch on those consoles as to upload their saved game to Telltale 's servers , and then access that from their new choice of platform .
Telltale will also provide a separate tool for players to " quick - create a tailored backstory " for Clementine to this point , with a possible 42 different variations , and create a save file from which to start the new season with .
Players may also opt to use the default backstory that Telltale has created as the basis for the game .
SYNOPSIS SETTING
Section::::Synopsis . Section::::Setting .
The Walking Dead : A New Frontier follows on the first game , and coincides with events of the comic , in which a zombie apocalypse has occurred , turning humans that are bitten or die into zombies , or " walkers " ; the only way to stop this conversion is to damage the brain .
The game is primarily set four years after the apocalypse began .
The protagonist of A New Frontier is Javier " Javi " Garcia ( Jeff Schine ) , a former professional baseball player .
His group consists of Kate ( Shelley Shenoy ) , the second wife of his brother David ( Alex Hernandez ) , and David 's children Gabe and Mariana .
He later meets Clementine ( Melissa Hutchison ) , a young teenager surviving on her own , and a major protagonist from the previous two seasons .
She continues to look after the baby from last season , Alvin Jr. Also returning from the previous seasons are Kenny ( Gavin Hammon ) and Jane ( Christine Lakin ) , whose fates are depending on the player 's decisions from the previous season .
Javi 's group meets new characters from the idyllic town of Prescott , including their leader Tripp and town doctor Eleanor ( Kelly Crowder ) .
The first episode 's trailer includes the group meeting Paul " Jesus " Monroe ( Brandon Keener ) , the ambassador of the Hilltop community from the comic series .
The trailer also describes " The New Frontier " as another group of survivors that have become twisted due to past events .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Javi is living with his parents and extended family in Baltimore at the onset of the walker epidemic .
This includes his brother David , David 's second wife Kate , and David 's children , Gabe and Mariana .
When Javi and David 's father dies of cancer , he turns and bites their mother .
When David takes her to the hospital but does not return for several months , Javi and Kate agree to move on and set off on the road with Gabe and Mariana .
Four years later , while scavenging for supplies , the four have a run - in with a group led by Max and Badger .
Javi is separated but is rescued by Clementine , who offers help in exchange for their family truck .
Clementine takes Javi to Prescott — a fortified community within an old airfield — where he is introduced to Tripp , Conrad , Francine , and Eleanor .
Tripp and Eleanor agree to help rescue Javi 's family .
In the rescue attempt , Mariana is killed by Max and Badger 's men and Kate is critically wounded .
Clementine identifies one of the attackers as a member of The New Frontier — a large group of survivors she had once met — claiming they were once good people , but have since turned corrupt .
The group return to Prescott to heal Kate when Max and Badger appear at the gates — having taken Francine hostage — and demand Javi turn himself over .
Regardless of Javi 's response , Badger kills Francine and unleashes a horde of walkers into Prescott .
Only Javi , Clementine , Tripp , Conrad , Eleanor , Kate , and Gabe survive .
After regrouping , Clementine suggests they go to Richmond , Virginia , where a sizable survivor camp can be found .
A walker horde separates the group : Eleanor stays with Kate while the others meet Paul " Jesus " Monroe , who takes them through a tunnel shortcut .
After Jesus reveals that the New Frontier controls Richmond , Clementine warns Javi that she used to be a member of the New Frontier and will leave the city when they arrive .
The group reaches Richmond and demand to be let in for Kate 's sake .
They are met by the town 's chief of security , revealed to be David .
David takes Kate and Gabe to Dr. Lingard for medical care and keeps the others in quarantine .
David later escorts Javi around Richmond , explaining that he became the New Frontier 's head of security after being unable to return to Baltimore .
He then introduces Javi to his second - in - command , Ava , and the two meet a recovering Kate , whose relationship with David is deteriorating .
Javi then meets with David and two of the other three New Frontier leaders — Clint and Joan — to argue his case for staying in Richmond .
Max arrives and accuses Javi of stealing New Frontier supplies and killing his men at the junkyard .
While David supports Javi , Joan and Clint refuse and exile Javi and his group .
As David returns , Clementine accuses him of being responsible for the death of the infant AJ ; flashbacks reveal that Clementine and AJ were forced to travel alone until they met Ava , who invited them into the New Frontier .
When AJ became deathly ill , Clementine attempted to steal medicine from Lingard to save his life , but was caught by David .
After David exiled Clementine but kept AJ , Clementine either bid goodbye to AJ or spat in David 's face .
David admits AJ is alive and safe in Richmond with Lingard .
The group then overhears Max , Badger , and Lonnie in the warehouse , which is full of supplies raided from other communities .
Badger is killed in retribution while an interrogated Max admits that Joan had ordered the raids .
Jesus takes his leave to warn his own group about Joan while the others return to Richmond to confront Joan and rescue Kate , Gabe , Eleanor , and AJ .
Joan turns on David by labeling him as a conspirator alongside Javi , and prepares to hang David the next day at the town square .
Javi escapes confinement and organizes his group with the aim of exposing Joan and escaping in a truck once they have rescued David .
Clementine and Javi meet up at the hospital and learn that AJ is being kept at a ranch outside of town .
Lingard demands being killed by injection in exchange for information , being no longer able to cope with the New Frontier 's actions .
Kate also admits her love for Javi , who has the option of reciprocating .
At the hanging , Joan makes accusations against Javi and reveals she has captured Ava and Tripp , demanding Javi determine who to spare .
Regardless , Joan betrays Javi and kills the one he chooses .
Clint offers Javi 's group a deal to leave Richmond peacefully , which Javi can accept or refuse by killing Joan .
Either choice leads to a firefight where Javi frees David .
Kate races into the square with the truck , but it is struck by a molotov cocktail and crashes into one of the city 's wall , which opens a breech and allows walkers to pour through .
The group barricade themselves in an apartment building and contemplate on how to save Richmond .
However , David views Richmond as a lost cause and suggests leaving the city , which only Gabe agrees with .
Having grown aggressive over suspicion of Javi and Kate 's closeness , David fights his brother until walkers begin to close in on them .
As David leaves in a truck with Gabe , Kate decides to man a bulldozer to help save Richmond ; Javi must decide whether to pursue David or help Kate .
Depending on the choices she made in her flashbacks , Clementine will decide to either choose one of the two , follow Javi 's lead , or split up from him .
Their choices result in Javi losing David , Gabe , and/or Kate .
Jesus returns with reinforcements and helps the survivors round up the walkers and lead them out of Richmond , saving the town .
Days later , Javi memorializes the ones lost and meets Jesus , who suggests that he becomes Richmond 's new leader .
Having learned AJ 's location from Lingard , Clementine decides to leave Richmond to find him .
After Javi gives Clementine a haircut , they bid goodbye
and she departs .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
The game is separated into five episodes , like the first and second seasons .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
When Telltale Games acquired the right to make video games based on The Walking Dead comics , they signed a contract for a " multi - year , multi - platform , multi - title " license .
This license went into effect after the success of the first season of The Walking Dead , when Telltale commissioned a second series of games based on the franchise .
The first season was considered highly successful , helping to revitalize the adventure game genre which had been in decline since the mid-1990s , with Telltale being recognized as one of the top development studios in 2012 .
During an interview on IGN 's Up at Noon , writer Gary Whitta teased more The Walking Dead from Telltale sooner than later .
" You wo n't have to wait for season two to play more Walking Dead " , he claimed .
" I can tell you what you already know , which is season two is coming .
There 's not much to say because it really is very early ...
it 's a way off " , said Whitta . "
But , knowing that it 's a way off , and knowing that people are hungry for more Walking Dead there may very well be more Walking Dead from Telltale before season two .
We may have a little something extra for you between season one and two " .
Whitta continued to tease that something is in the works right now " that will make the wait for season two slightly less agonizing " .
This was revealed at the 2013 Electronic Entertainment Expo in June 2013 to be an additional episode called The Walking Dead : 400 Days that is available as downloadable content for the first season .
It introduces five new characters that journalists expect to carry into Season Two .
400 Days will use data about the player 's decisions in season one , and decisions made in 400 Days will carry into Season Two .
Telltale 's Sean Ainsworth and Dennis Lenart stated that the third season is going to feature a " new angle " from the story .
It was confirmed by Robert Kirkman that Clementine would return for Season 3 .
Robert Kirkman also said the game will almost be at the same point as the current comic timeline .
He also said more comic - related events will happen .
During a 2015 E3 Discussion with Greg Miller and Job Stauffer , Stauffer implied that Season 3 will be " a long ways off " and " considerably larger " than previous games .
Stauffer hinted that some Comic Series characters will appear in Season 3 .
Season 3 was planned to tie in all the possible endings that players from previous seasons may have taken , but as well as to draw in new players to the series .
With the planned influx of new players and those that have transitioned off older consoles and do not have access to save games , Telltale provided a story generator tool that asks the player several questions as to customize a starting point for A New Frontier .
These questions were developed by evaluating around 40,000 playthroughs that covered Season One and Two , and grouping the general pattern of choices made by players into a total of 42 distinct scenarios , from which they derived questions that would help guide a new player to fall in one of these sets .
Bruner said they were more looking at patterns of behavior rather than specific decisions that had been made ; for example , the decision whether to kill Lee at his request before he turns or leave him at the end of Season One was found to " representative of some pretty complicated motivations " of the sum of players ' choices in the game , and thus wanted this story generator to capture the motivation rather than the result .
In an interview with IGN , Kirkman stated that the third season will bring the video game closer to the comic book 's current time frame at the time of its planned release .
This season will take place a few years after the second season , and will include a somewhat older Clementine along with AJ , the infant she rescues at the end of Season 2 and now a toddler .
Clementine will be a playable character along with a new character , Javier .
Telltale is working to adapt its previous data about player choices from the first two seasons , which were saved locally to a player 's computer or console , to work with their new cloud - based saving approach , so that these previous choices will affect how the story in the third season will play out .
Telltale is expected to provide more details around the 2016 Comic - Con .
The game will use the updated Telltale game engine that it is using for its Batman game .
During the 2016 PAX Expo , Telltale revealed the third season will be released in November 2016 , with the subtitle A New Frontier .
Telltale later had to delay the first episode 's release until December 20 , 2016 .
Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment will publish retail versions of Season 3 as part of a deal with Telltale for Batman that was released in August 2016 .
The physical edition is expected to release on February 24 , 2017 in North America and March 3 , 2017 in Europe ; it will contain the first two episodes on disc and digital codes to redeem the other episodes once they are available .
A Nintendo Switch version is scheduled for release in 2018 .
SEQUEL
Section::::Sequel .
In July 2017 , Telltale Games and Skybound Entertainment announced the fourth and final season titled which is set to be released in 2018 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The Walking Dead : A New Frontier received mixed - to - positive reviews from critics with particular praise aimed at its new cast of characters , updated engine , pathos , and overall new direction .
However , the short episode lengths and the treatment of the Season Two endings were both subjects of criticism .
The game 's story and Clementine 's shift to a supporting role have both been met with a mixed response .
EPISODE 1 :
TIES
THAT BIND PART
ONE
Section::::Episode 1 :
Ties That Bind Part One .
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the Microsoft Windows version 81/100 based on 35 reviews , the PlayStation 4 version 80/100 based on 10 reviews and the Xbox One version 78/100 based on 14 reviews .
EPISODE 2 :
TIES THAT BIND PART
TWO
Section::::Episode 2 :
Ties That Bind Part Two .
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the Microsoft Windows version 80/100 based on 33 reviews , the PlayStation 4 version 80/100 based on 9 reviews and the Xbox One version 78/100 based on 13 reviews .
EPISODE 3 :
ABOVE THE LAW Section::::Episode 3 :
Above the Law .
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the Microsoft Windows version 75/100 based on 29 reviews , the PlayStation 4 version 69/100 based on 8 reviews and the Xbox One version 73/100 based on 6 reviews .
EPISODE 4 :
THICKER THAN WATER
Section::::Episode 4 : Thicker Than Water .
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the Microsoft Windows version 72/100 based on 28 reviews , the PlayStation 4 version 65/100 based on 5 reviews and the Xbox One version 73/100 based on 4 reviews .
EPISODE 5 : FROM THE GALLOWS Section::::Episode 5 : From the Gallows .
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the Microsoft Windows version 74/100 based on 23 reviews , the PlayStation 4 version 71/100 based on 5 reviews and the Xbox One version 64/100 based on 6 reviews .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website