SINGAPORE AND THE UNITED NATIONS
The Republic of Singapore officially became the 117th member of the United Nations ( UN ) after its independence on September 21 , 1965 .
From 2001 to 2002 , Singapore held a rotational seat on the United Nations Security Council and has participated in UN peacekeeping / observer missions in Kuwait , Angola , Kenya , Cambodia and Timor Leste .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Before independence , Singapore had merged with the Federation of Malaya with North Borneo and Sarawak to form Malaysia .
At that time , the Federation of Malaysia was already a member of the UN and after Singapore 's independence due to distrust and ideological differences between leaders of the State of Singapore and the federal government of Malaysia , Singapore was officially registered as a member of the UN on September 21 , 1965 , with Abu Bakar bin Pawanchee serving as the first permanent representative to the UN .
Since then , Singapore has been actively participating in UN peacekeeping operations .
In 1997 , the country became only the seventh country to sign the Memorandum of Understanding on UN Standby Arrangements .
ACTIVITIES SECURITY COUNCIL
Section::::Activities .
Section::::Security Council .
During the 2000 United Nations Security Council election , Singapore was elected as one of the five non - permanent members of the UN Security Council serving for two - year terms from 2001 to 2002 .
In January 2001 and May 2002 , Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani , the permanent representative of Singapore then , served as the President of the United Nations Security Council together with Ambassador S. Jayakumar .
PEACEKEEPING AND OBSERVER MISSIONS
Section::::Peacekeeping and observer missions .
Singapore 's first peacekeeping mission was to oversee Namibia 's transition to independence , was in response to an urgent call for help from then UN General - Secretary Javier Perez de Cuellar on 29 March 1989 .
Since 1989 , Singapore has taken part in 16 peacekeeping and observer missions with personnel from the Singapore Armed Forces ( SAF ) .
REPRESENTATION NEW YORK AND GENEVA Section::::Representation . Section::::New York and Geneva .
Singapore maintains two permanent missions to the UN .
With one in New York , which is headed by Ambassador Karen Tan and one in Geneva , which is headed by Ambassador Foo Kok Jwee .
SEE ALSO * Foreign relations of Singapore
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Permanent Mission of the Republic of Singapore
* United Nations Member States