ALICE THROUGH THE LOOKING GLASS ( 2016 FILM )
Alice Through the Looking Glass is a 2016 American fantasy adventure film directed by James Bobin , written by Linda Woolverton and produced by Tim Burton , Joe Roth , Suzanne Todd , and Jennifer Todd .
It is based on the characters created by Lewis Carroll and is the sequel to the 2010 film Alice in Wonderland .
The film stars Johnny Depp , Anne Hathaway , Mia Wasikowska , Matt Lucas , Rhys Ifans , Helena Bonham Carter , and Sacha Baron Cohen and features the voices of Stephen Fry , Michael Sheen , Timothy Spall , and Alan Rickman .
In the film , Alice comes across a magical looking glass that takes her back to Wonderland , where she finds that the Mad Hatter is acting madder than usual and wants to discover the truth about his family .
Alice then travels through time ( with the " Chronosphere " ) , comes across friends and enemies at different points of their lives , and embarks on a race to save the Hatter before time runs out .
The film premiered in London on May 10 , 2016 , and was theatrically released by Walt Disney Pictures on May 27 , 2016 .
Alice Through the Looking Glass received generally unfavorable reviews from critics , and grossed $ 299 million on a budget of $ 170 million , becoming a box office bomb .
The film was dedicated to Alan Rickman , who died four months before the film was released .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Alice Kingsleigh has spent the past three years following in her father 's footsteps and sailing the high seas .
Upon her return to London from China , she learns her ex - fiancé , Hamish Ascot , has taken over his father 's company and plans to have Alice sign over her father 's ship in exchange for her family home .
Alice follows a butterfly she recognizes as Absolem and returns to Wonderland through a mirror .
Alice is greeted by the White Queen , the White Rabbit , the Tweedles , the Dormouse , the March Hare , Bayard and the Cheshire Cat .
They inform her that the Mad Hatter , Tarrant Hightopp , is acting madder than usual because his family is missing .
Alice tries to console him , but the Mad Hatter remains sure of his family 's survival of the Attack of the Jabberwocky day .
Believing that finding the Hatter 's family is the only way to stop his deteriorating health , the White Queen sends Alice to consult Time himself and convince him to save the Hatter 's family in the past .
The Queen cautions Alice that history will be destroyed if anyone sees their past or future self .
Upon visiting Time 's palace , Alice finds the Chronosphere , an object that powers all time in Underland .
After being told by Time that altering the past is impossible , Alice steals the Chronosphere and travels back in time , shortly after finding the exiled Red Queen , Iracebeth of Crims , is in the care of Time .
The Red Queen urges Time to go after Alice .
Alice accidentally flies to the day of Iracebeth 's coronation , where a younger Tarrant begins a mockery of the Red Queen when the royal crown does not fit her abnormal head .
This causes Iracebeth to melt down .
Her father deems her inappropriate to rule and passes the title of queen to her younger sister Mirana , the White Queen .
Alice learns of an event in Iracebeth and Mirana 's past that caused friction between the two , and she travels back in time again , hoping it will change Iracebeth 's ways and cease the Jabberwocky from killing the Hatter 's family .
The young Mirana steals a tart from her mother and eats it .
When confronted by their mother , Mirana lies about eating the tart , and Iracebeth is accused , causing her to run out of the castle in sadness .
Alice sees her about to run into a clock , the event that deforms her head and personality .
She is able to get the clock out of the way , but fails to change the past as Iracebeth trips and slams her head anyway .
Alice is then confronted by a weakened Time , who scolds her for putting all of time in danger .
She runs into a nearby mirror back into the real world , where she wakes up in a mental hospital , diagnosed with female hysteria .
By the help of her mother , she returns to Underland , where she travels to the Attack of the Jabberwocky and discovers that the Hatter 's family never died , but were captured by Iracebeth .
Returning to the present , Alice discovers the Hatter at the brink of death .
After Alice tearfully says that she believes him , Tarrant awakens and reforms back to his normal self .
The Underlanders go to the Red Queen 's castle , where Tarrant finds his family shrunk and trapped in an ant farm .
Iracebeth apprehends them and steals the Chronosphere from Alice , taking Mirana back to the day she lied about the tart .
By the time Tarrant and Alice get there , Iracebeth and her past self see each other .
Time becomes irrelevant , and Underland begins to freeze .
Using the Chronosphere , Alice and the Hatter race back to the present , where Alice is able to place the Chronosphere back in its original place .
With the Chronosphere stabilized , Underland reverts to normal .
The Hatter reunites with his family .
Mirana apologizes to Iracebeth for lying , and both of them make amends .
Alice bids her friends farewell and returns to the real world where her mother refuses to return Alice 's ship over to Hamish , and the two set to travel the world together with their own company .
CAST * Mia Wasikowska as Alice Kingsleigh
* Johnny Depp as Tarrant Hightopp ( Mad Hatter ) * Louis Ashbourne Serkis as Young Tarrant Hightopp * Helena Bonham Carter as Iracebeth of Crims ( Red Queen )
* Leilah de Meza as Young Iracebeth
* Anne Hathaway as Mirana of Marmoreal ( White Queen )
* Amelia Crouch as Young Mirana
* Sacha Baron Cohen as Time , a powerful Father Time - godlike human / clockwork hybrid who speaks in a German accent and rules over all of time " himself " in Underland using the Chronosphere in his castle .
* Rhys Ifans as Zanik Hightopp , the Mad Hatter 's father .
* Matt Lucas as Tweedledum and Tweedledee * Lindsay Duncan as Helen Kingsleigh , Alice 's mother .
* Leo Bill as Hamish Ascot , now " Lord Ascot " following his father 's death .
* Geraldine James as Lady Ascot , Hamish 's mother .
* Joanna Bobin as Alexandra Ascot , Hamish 's wife .
* Andrew Scott as Dr. Addison Bennett , a cruel psychiatric doctor .
* Ed Speleers as James Harcourt , an employee of the Ascots .
* Richard Armitage as King Oleron , Iracebeth and Mirana 's father
* Hattie Morahan as Queen Elsemere , Iracebeth and Mirana 's mother
* Simone Kirby as Tyva Hightopp , the Hatter 's mother .
* Joe Hurst as Bim Hightopp * Oliver Hawkes as a Young Bim Hightopp * Siobhan Redmond as Bumalic Hightopp * Frederick Warder as Poomally Hightopp * Eve Hedderwick Turner as Baloo Hightopp
* Tom Godwin as Pimlick Hightopp VOICE CAST
* Alan Rickman as Absolem ( Butterfly )
* Stephen Fry as Cheshire ( Cheshire Cat )
* Michael Sheen as Nivens McTwisp ( White Rabbit )
* Timothy Spall as Bayard Hamar ( Bloodhound ) * Kyle Hebert as Young Bayard
* Barbara Windsor as Mallymkun ( The Dormouse )
* Matt Vogel as Wilkins , Time 's long - suffering manservant .
Toby Jones was originally announced in the role .
* Paul Whitehouse as Thackery Earwicket ( March Hare ) * Wally Wingert as Humpty Dumpty ; John Sessions was originally slated to voice the character .
*
Meera Syal as Nobody
* Edward Petherbridge as Gentleman Fish * Owain Rhys Davies as Delivery Frog
* Paul Hunter as White Chess King PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The film was announced via Variety in December 2012 .
Bobin was first approached about the project while doing post - production work on Muppets Most Wanted .
Of being asked , Bobin has said that " I just could n't pass it up " , as he has a passion for the works of Lewis Carroll as well as history in general .
In July 2013 , it was announced that Johnny Depp would return as the Hatter , with Mia Wasikowska 's return confirmed the following November .
In January 2014 Sacha Baron Cohen joined the cast to play Time .
In May 2014 , Rhys Ifans joined the cast to play Zanik Hightopp , the Mad Hatter 's father .
In developing the character of " Time " , Bobin sought to avoid creating a " straight - up bad guy " , noting that it would be " a bit dull " , and also that the role in that universe already existed in the form of The Red Queen .
Instead , Bobin sought to make Time a " Twit " , further explaining that " There 's no one better at playing the confident idiot trope than Sacha Baron Cohen " , and adding that " it was very much with Sacha in mind " .
Principal photography began on August 4 , 2014 , at Shepperton Studios .
In August 2014 , filming took place in Gloucester Docks , which included the use of at least four historic ships : Kathleen and May , Irene , Excelsior , and the Earl of Pembroke , the last of which was renamed The Wonder for filming .
Principal photography ended on October 31 , 2014 .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The film 's score was composed by Danny Elfman .
The soundtrack was released on May 27 , 2016 , by Walt Disney Records .
Pink recorded the song " Just Like Fire " for the film , and also covered Jefferson Airplane 's " White Rabbit " , only used in the film 's promotional material .
TRACK LISTING
Section::::Track listing .
All music composed by Danny Elfman .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Alice Through the Looking Glass premiered in London on May 10 , 2016 , and was theatrically released on May 27 , 2016 , in the United States by Walt Disney Pictures .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Alice Through the Looking Glass was released on Blu - ray , DVD and digital download on October 18 , 2016 , by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment .
It debuted at No . 2 in the Blu - ray Disc sales charts .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Alice Through the Looking Glass grossed $ 77 million in the United States and Canada and $ 222.4 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 299.5 million , against a production budget of $ 170 million .
The Hollywood Reporter estimated the film lost the studio around $ 70 million , when factoring together all expenses and revenues .
Alice Through the Looking Glass opened in the United States and Canada on May 27 , 2016 , alongside , and was initially projected to gross $ 55–60 million from 3,763 theaters over its four - day Memorial Day opening weekend , but projections were continuously revised downwards due to poor word of mouth .
It had the added benefit of playing in over 3,100 3D theaters , 380 IMAX screens , 77 premium large formats and 79 D - box locations .
It made $ 1.5 million from Thursday previews ( to the first film 's $ 3.9 million ) and just $ 9.7 million on its first day , compared to the $ 41 million opening Friday of its predecessor .
Through its opening weekend , it earned $ 26.9 million , which when compared to its predecessor 's $ 116 million opening is down 70 % .
While 3D represented 71 % ( $ 82 million ) of the original film 's opening gross , 3D constituted only 41 % ( $ 11 million ) for this sequel , with 29 % coming from traditional 3D shows , 11 % from IMAX , and 1 % from premium large formats .
It was the studio 's third production with a low Memorial Day opening after Tomorrowland in 2015 and in 2010 .
During its first week , the film grossed $ 40.1 million .
In its second weekend , the film grossed $ 11.3 million ( a 55.1 % drop ) , finishing 4th at the box office .
The film was released across 43 countries ( 72 % of its total market place ) the same weekend as the US , and was estimated to gross $ 80–100 million in its opening weekend .
It faced competition from Warcraft and X - Men :
Apocalypse .
It ended up grossing $ 62.7 million , which is well below the projections of which $ 4.1 million came from IMAX shows .
It had an opening weekend gross in Mexico ( $ 4.5 million ) , Brazil ( $ 4.1 million ) , and Russia ( $ 3.9 million ) .
In the United Kingdom and Ireland , it had an unsuccessful opening by grossing just £ 2.23 million ( $ 3.1 million ) during its opening weekend , a mere 21 % of the first film 's £ 10.56 million ( $ 15.2 million ) opening from 603 theaters .
It debuted in second place behind which was on its second weekend of play .
In China , it had an opening day of an estimated $ 7.3 million and went on to score the second biggest Disney live - action ( non - Marvel or Lucasfilm ) opening ever with $ 26.6 million , behind only The Jungle Book .
However , this was down from its $ 35–45 million projections .
It debuted at the No . 1 spot among newly released film in Japan with $ 5.2 million and $ 4.1 million on Saturday and Sunday .
By comparison , the first film opened with $ 14 million on its way to a $ 133.6 million a total .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 30 % based on 243 reviews , and an average rating of 4.6/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Alice Through the Looking Glass is just as visually impressive as its predecessor , but that is n't enough to cover for an underwhelming story that fails to live up to its classic characters . "
On Metacritic , the film has a score of 34 out of 100 based on 42 critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A – " on an A+ to F scale , the same grade earned by its predecessor .
Stephen Holden of The New York Times wrote in his review , " What does all this have to do with Lewis Carroll ?
Hardly anything " and that overall , " It 's just an excuse on which to hang two trite overbearing fables and one amusing one " .
Ty Burr of The Boston Globe gave the movie 1.5 out of 4 stars and called the film , " gaudy , loud , complacent , and vulgar . "
Stephen Whitty of New York Daily News called the film " hugely expensive and extravagantly stupid " and that , overall , the movie " is just one more silly Hollywood mashup , an innocent fantasy morphed into a noisy would - be blockbuster " .
Matt Zoller Seitz of RogerEbert.com was deeply critical of Alice Through the Looking Glass , describing it as " the most offensive kind of film ... one that spends an enormous amount of money yet seems to have nothing on its mind but money .
You give it , they take it .
And you get nothing in return but assurances that you 're seeing magic and wonder .
The movie keeps repeating it in your ear , and flashing it onscreen in big block letters : MAGIC AND WONDER .
MAGIC AND WONDER .
But there is no magic , no wonder , just junk rehashed from a movie that was itself a rehash of Lewis Carroll , tricked out with physically unpersuasive characters and landscapes and ' action scenes ' , with blockbuster ' journey movie ' tropes affixed to every set - piece as blatantly as Post - It Notes . "
Kyle Smith of New York Post gave the film a positive review : "
The screenplay ( by Linda Woolverton ) is n't exactly heaving with brilliant ideas , but it works well enough as a blank canvas against which the special - effects team goes bonkers " .
Matthew Lickona of San Diego Reader said that while he found the visual effects to be " stupidly expensive " and the story familiar , he called it , " a solid kids ' movie in the old style " .
ACCOLADES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS