THE LATE LATE SHOW WITH JAMES CORDEN
The Late Late Show with James Corden ( also known as Late Late ) is an American late - night talk show hosted by James Corden on CBS .
It is the fourth and current iteration of The Late Late Show .
Airing in the U.S. from Monday to Friday nights , it is taped in front of a studio audience Monday through Thursday afternoons – during weeks in which first - run episodes are scheduled to air – at CBS Television City in Los Angeles , California in Studio 56 , directly above the Bob Barker Studio ( Studio 33 ) .
It is produced by Fulwell 73 and CBS Television Studios .
Corden was announced as the show 's new host on September 8 , 2014 , succeeding Craig Ferguson .
Originally scheduled to premiere on March 9 , 2015 , CBS later pushed back the premiere to March 23 , 2015 so they could use the NCAA basketball tournament to promote Corden 's debut .
On April 4 , 2017 , it was confirmed that Corden would bring The Late Late Show to the UK for three special episodes taped at the Central Hall Westminster .
It was the third time in the history of the programme that it aired from another country , with Ferguson taking his incarnation to Paris , France in 2011 and Scotland in 2012 .
Corden announced that the show would once again film a week of shows in London from 18 June 2018 .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Corden said he was " thrilled and honored " and found it " hugely exciting ... to host such a prestigious show " .
CBS Entertainment chairman Nina Tassler said in a statement that Corden is a warm , charming and original performer whose " diverse range of creative instincts and performance talent " make him a " rare entertainment force " .
Tassler cited Corden 's work in such media as theatre , film and television , and called him " loved and respected " in all of them .
The show continues to be produced at CBS Television City in Los Angeles .
Corden made a surprise guest appearance on predecessor Ferguson 's programme on December 16 , 2014 , two days prior to Ferguson 's last broadcast as host , during which the two briefly discussed Corden taking over the show .
He also appeared on an episode hosted by Judd Apatow to job shadow , stating he wanted to " learn from his mistakes " .
Unlike his predecessors , Corden 's Late Late Show has a house band , nicknamed " Karen " , led by Reggie Watts who also acts as the show 's announcer .
Watts also performs as lead vocals , keyboards , beatboxing , and programmer .
The other personnel in the band are Tim Young on lead guitars , Steve Scalfatti on keyboards , Hagar Ben Ari on bass , and Guillermo E. Brown on drums .
The show 's title sequence , which was supposed to be directed by J.J. Abrams , was filmed by the visual firm of Trollbäck + Company .
Watts and the Late Late Show Band composed the theme song .
According to a report in the Daily Mail : " Corden hopes the credits will show him riding a BMX bike around Los Angeles , with other on - screen talent joining him as he reaches the CBS studio .
" The show 's executive producers are Rob Crabbe and Ben Winston .
The final product being James Corden and Reggie Watts going around LA in a Low Rider , LED bike , and some graphic and light painting with a Pixelstick .
Trollbäck + Company put this statement below the video : " James Corden and Reggie Watts put the LA LA back into Late Late in a series fun vignettes filmed around Los Angeles for the identity of the new CBS Late Late Show .
James originally wanted JJ Abrams to film him and Reggie scored to a Mark Ronson track .
We were of course honored to take JJ 's place as he was a bit busy filming a blockbuster !
We managed to shoot everything in one night with LED bikes , a Lowrider , and a Pixelstick setting an eclectic visual tone for this experimental new show . "
While an opening monologue is a staple of the late night talk show genre , Corden suggested initially that as he is not a stand - up comedian , he would also be using alternatives to the traditional joke - heavy monologue .
However , the show has retained the monologue though it is shorter and not as important an element as the monologue on other late night shows .
The show also uses an interview format similar to that of British chat show The Graham Norton Show , in which all of the night 's guests appear on stage simultaneously .
Guests do not walk on stage from the wings but emerge from the back of the studio and walk through the audience rows .
As is more typical in British talk shows , the host sits to the left of the guests , a reversal of the traditional American layout .
Corden also does not sit behind a desk , unlike other late night hosts , but in a swivel chair .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
Tom Hanks and Mila Kunis were Corden 's first guests on March 23 , 2015 , for the debut episode featuring Corden and Hanks acting and singing their way through a retrospective of Hanks ' career .
Later , after a prompt by Hanks , Corden appeared to score a coup by getting Mila Kunis to admit that she and Ashton Kutcher are married , but a source later claimed she was merely joking .
The episode scored 1.66 million viewers , the show 's biggest Monday rating in more than three years .
First - run episodes aired every weeknight through the May 2015 sweeps period ; then , beginning the week of May 25 , the show scaled back its production schedule to four first - run episodes per week ( differing from the previous iterations of the program , which produced Friday episodes , either the day of broadcast or farther in advance on the tape date of the Thursday edition ) , with the Friday episode consisting of a rebroadcast of a recent episode , as has become common with several other late - night talk shows ( with the exception of The Late Show and The Tonight Show , which continue to produce first - run episodes on that night , and many airing on cable , which almost universally do not air episodes on Fridays at all ) .
Even with Corden 's debut week , Late Night with Seth Meyers still beat The Late Late Show in the ratings during the 12:35 a.m. time slot , with Meyers continuing to dominate that slot on a weekly basis .
The May 20 , 2015 episode , which followed the finale of Late Show with David Letterman , was the highest rated episode of The Late Late Show in the history of the franchise with an audience of 4 million viewers and a rating of 2.5 .
, despite starting 20 minutes late due to Letterman 's show running over its scheduled end time .
The episode featured Corden and Sting outside of the Ed Sullivan Theater singing "
Every Breath You Take " in the show 's cold open and a monologue with a Top Ten List among other tributes to Letterman .
RECURRING SEGMENTS
* Carpool Karaoke , a segment in which James and musical guests sing along to their songs whilst driving on a planned route usually in Los Angeles .
Corden explained that the segment was inspired by a Gavin & Stacey - themed sketch he had participated in for the British charity television special Red Nose Day 2011 , in which he sang along with George Michael in a car , stating that " Ben Winston and I always thought there was something very joyful about someone very , very famous singing their songs in an ordinary situation .
We just had this idea : Los Angeles , traffic , the carpool lane —
maybe this is something we could pull off .
"
The segments , which have featured artists such as Lady Gaga , Foo Fighters , Britney Spears , Take That , Chris Martin , Selena Gomez , Iggy Azalea , Justin Bieber , Stevie Wonder , One Direction , Adele , Barbra Streisand , Demi Lovato , Mariah Carey , Sia , Harry Styles , Katy Perry , Bruno Mars , Ed Sheeran , Ariana Grande , and the Red Hot Chili Peppers , have proven popular as viral videos on the Late Late Shows YouTube channel .
A Carpool Karaoke segment featuring Adele reached 42 million views within 5 days , making it the most viral video originating from a late night program since 2013 .
The Adele segment has received over 184 million views as of August 2018 .
A segment featuring the then First Lady Michelle Obama ( eventually joined by Missy Elliott singing " This is for My Girls " ) was released on July 20 , 2016 , and has reached over 55 million views as of May 2017 .
On March 29 , 2016 , CBS aired a primetime special featuring highlights of the segment , and a new edition with Jennifer Lopez .
The special would win a 2016 Emmy Award for Outstanding Variety Special .
* Drop the Mic : Corden and one or more guests trade insults in a ( scripted ) rap battle .
Guests who participated include David Schwimmer , Rebel Wilson , Cara Delevingne , Dave Franco , Kevin Hart , Anne Hathaway , and Riz Ahmed .
In August 2016 , TBS ordered a version of Drop the Mic from CBS as a series .
It premiered in 2017 , with Corden , Ben Winston , and Jensen Karp as producers .
* The Bold and the Lyrical : James and multiple celebrity guests act out a dramatic soap opera scene using the lyrics of some of today 's biggest acts in music .
* Riff - Off
: James challenges a celebrity guest to a vocal battle , with the assistance of Filipino - American a cappella group The Filharmonic .
Guests include Anna Kendrick , Shawn Mendes , Neil Patrick Harris , Demi Lovato , Jamie Foxx , Ansel Elgort , Liam Payne , Luke Evans , Queen , and Usher .
* Take a Break : James pretends to do the job of someone in an industry , subsequently " giving them a break . "
During this segment , James has worked at LensCrafters and Planet Hollywood Resort & Casino , as well as a model on The Price Is Right and the Mayor of Los Angeles , among other jobs .
* Crosswalk the Musical :
James and guests hold flash mob - style performances of songs from musicals in the middle of a crosswalk when cars stop at it .
* Talking Mentalist : Over the summer of 2015 , where CBS had aired reruns of its drama programming as a lead - in to The Late Late Show to lead up towards the premiere of The Late Show with Stephen Colbert , several episodes opened with Talking Mentalist — a parody of companion " after - shows " such as Talking Dead in which James and his guests would discuss the rerun of The Mentalist that had just aired .
After CBS followed suit , the sketch was reprised as Talking Hawaii Five-0 , which featured a guest appearance by Talking Dead host Chris Hardwick .
* Celebrity Noses : Corden attempts to conduct an unspecified activity involving the noses of celebrities , but is repeatedly stalled by various problems that prevent the segment from even occurring .
* Spill Your Guts or Fill Your Guts : James and that night 's guests join in on a game that involves a roundtable question - and - answer portion .
Both of them have the option to answer a really embarrassing , self - deprecating , or controversial question - however , should they choose to not answer the question , they will have to eat various forms of disgusting food , ranging from small insects , bodily fluids , or animal offal or organs .
* Flinch : James and a group of guests participate in a game where pieces of fruit are fired out of a mini remote controlled cannon , designed as Corden 's face , towards one of the guests standing behind a plastic wall .
Corden usually distracts the guest by asking them questions and then tries to make them flinch by unexpectedly firing a piece of fruit mid - conversation .
The winner usually is the one who flinches the least .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS
PRIMETIME EMMY AWARDS 2016 rowspan="3 " CREATIVE ARTS EMMY AWARDS
The Late Late Show Carpool Karaoke Primetime Special ; Rob Crabbe , Ben Winston , Mike Gibbons , Sheila Rogers , Michael Kaplan , Jeff Kopp , Josie Cliff and James Corden CRITICS ' CHOICE TELEVISION AWARDS 2014
rowspan="4"Best Talk Show
rowspan="4"The
Late Late Show with James Corden 2015 2016 2017 BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
In India the show is aired at 1 pm Indian Standard Time ( IST ) , 8 pm ( IST ) and 11:56pm ( IST ) on Zee Cafe and Zee Cafe HD ( repeats included ) .
In the UK and Ireland since 2016 the show airs on Sky 's ' On Demand ' service as well as Now TV with each episode available the day after its US broadcast .
Sky Q customers also get to watch some content from the show in the ' Online Video ' section .
In Canada , The Late Late Show with James Corden is aired by CTV in simulcast with CBS .
The program formerly aired on sister network CTV Two , but moved to the main CTV network on February 8 , 2016 , switching with Late Night with Seth Meyers .
In Australia , the series was purchased by CBS 's then - Australian partner network Network Ten .
It premiered on Network Ten 's sister network Eleven ( now 10 Peach ) on May 24 , 2015 , on a seven - day - a - week airing schedule to catch up with the current run through the northern hemisphere summer ( by September and the start of the new American television season it had caught up and now airs on a day - delay with repeats at weekends ) ; CBS has owned 10 Peach ( and Network Ten itself ) since it purchased Ten Network Holdings in the last half of 2017 .
In France the show airs at 11:35 pm every Monday to Friday on MCM .
In New Zealand the show began to air on state - owned broadcaster TVNZ 's channel Duke at 7 pm on weeknights , from March 20 , 2016 .
In Asia , the show premiered on August 3 , 2015 , on RTL CBS Entertainment .
It broadcasts on weekday nights following The Late Show with Stephen Colbert .
In Finland , the show was aired on Yle TV2 at 10 pm from Wednesday to Saturday , with
two days delay compared to US broadcast .
It premiered on May 24 , 2017 and was aired until May 2018 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * James Corden on Twitter *
The Late Late Show with James Corden on Twitter
*
The Late Late Show with James Corden on Facebook