STAR
TREK BEYOND
Star Trek Beyond is a 2016 American space opera film directed by Justin Lin and written by Simon Pegg and Doug Jung , based on the television series Star Trek created by Gene Roddenberry .
It is the thirteenth film in the Star Trek film franchise and the third installment in the reboot series , following Star Trek ( 2009 ) and Star Trek Into Darkness ( 2013 ) .
Chris Pine and Zachary Quinto reprise their respective roles as Captain James T. Kirk and Commander Spock , with Pegg , Karl Urban , Zoe Saldana , John Cho , and Anton Yelchin reprising their roles from the previous films .
This was one of Yelchin 's last films before his death in June 2016 .
Idris Elba , Sofia Boutella , Joe Taslim , and Lydia Wilson also appear .
Principal photography began in Vancouver on June 25 , 2015 .
The film premiered in Sydney on July 7 , 2016 , and was released in the United States on July 22 , 2016 , by Paramount Pictures .
The film is dedicated to the memory of Yelchin , as well as to actor Leonard Nimoy , who died during pre - production .
The film grossed $ 343.5 million at the box office , and received generally positive reviews with praise for its acting , action sequences , musical score , visual effects , and tributes to Yelchin and Nimoy .
At the 89th Academy Awards , the film was nominated for Best Makeup and Hairstyling , but lost to Suicide Squad .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Three years into its mission , the USS Enterprise arrives at Yorktown , a massive space station , for resupply and shore leave for her crew .
Struggling to find meaning in their endless exploration , Captain James T. Kirk has applied for a promotion to vice admiral ; he recommends Spock as his replacement .
Meanwhile , Hikaru Sulu reunites with his family , Montgomery Scott works to keep the ship operational , and Spock and Nyota Uhura amicably end their relationship ; Spock also receives word from New Vulcan that Ambassador Spock , his counterpart from the original timeline , has died .
The Enterprise is sent on a rescue mission after an escape pod drifts out of a nearby uncharted nebula .
Its occupant , Kalara , claims her ship is stranded on Altamid , a planet in the nebula .
As the Enterprise exits an asteroid field within the nebula , a massive swarm of small ships ambushes and quickly overwhelms the starship , disconnecting the ship 's warp nacelles in a matter of seconds .
The swarm 's leader , Krall , and his crew board the crippled Enterprise , capture and kill many crew members , and recover a relic , the Abronath , that Kirk had recently obtained .
Scotty manages to restore enough power for the ship to attempt to flee , but Krall orders his swarm to destroy the Enterprise , and they smash the ship in half .
Kirk , having recovered the Abronath , orders the crew to abandon ship , leaving the remains of the Enterprise to crash on Altamid .
On the planet , Krall captures Sulu , Uhura and other survivors .
Kirk and Pavel Chekov , accompanied by Kalara , locate the Enterprises saucer section .
Realising that Kalara knew they would be attacked , they trick her into revealing herself as Krall 's spy .
To escape Krall 's soldiers , Kirk and Chekov use the ship 's thrusters to flip the saucer over , and Kalara is killed in the maneuver .
Elsewhere on the planet , Dr. Leonard McCoy and a wounded Spock search for other survivors .
Spock explains to McCoy that the tension he witnessed between him and Uhura at Yorktown was due to his intention to leave Starfleet to help the Vulcan survivors , and continue the late Ambassador Spock 's work .
Jaylah , a scavenger who previously escaped Krall 's encampment , rescues Scott and takes him to her makeshift home , the grounded , an early Starfleet vessel reported missing over a century earlier .
Scott is reunited with Kirk , Chekov , McCoy and Spock .
Threatening to kill the crew , Krall coerces Ensign Syl to hand over the Abronath that she had concealed for Kirk , then uses it on her to demonstrate an ancient bioweapon that can disintegrate any humanoid .
With the device complete , Krall intends to kill Yorktowns inhabitants , then use the base to attack the Federation .
Kirk and the others free the crew as Krall launches into space with the bioweapon , leading his drones to Yorktown .
As the Enterprise survivors power up the Franklin and launch her in pursuit of Krall , they deduce that such a massive swarm must coordinate its attacks via radio signals , specifically in the VHF frequency band .
Scott transports Spock and McCoy into one of the swarm ships to seize control of it .
Matching the swarm 's frequency , they jam and disorient the swarm by broadcasting the 1994 song " Sabotage " by the Beastie Boys , destroying almost the entire fleet .
Krall and his three surviving ships , one of which contains Spock and McCoy , are chased by the Franklin through Yorktown .
The chase ends at the station 's headquarters , where the Franklins sudden appearance causes the three ships to smash into it .
As Krall flees into the starbase , Uhura and Kirk discover from the Franklins logs that he is actually Balthazar Edison , former captain of the Franklin .
A pre - Federation human soldier , Edison rejected the Federation 's principles of unity and cooperation with former enemies like the Xindi .
When he and his crew were stranded on Altamid by a wormhole , the three survivors used the extinct natives 's technology to prolong their lives at the cost of the others , and re - purposed the ancient race 's dormant drone workers into the swarm .
Thinking the Federation had abandoned them , Edison planned to destroy the Federation and resume galactic conflict .
Kirk pursues Edison into Yorktowns ventilation system , where Edison activates the bioweapon .
Before it can activate , Kirk ejects it and Edison into space , where the weapon consumes Edison .
Using the alien ship they commandeered , Spock and McCoy save Kirk moments before he is also blown into space .
In the aftermath , Commodore Paris closes the files of Captain Edison and the USS Franklin crew .
Kirk decides to keep his position as the Enterprises captain ; Spock chooses to remain in Starfleet , and begins to renew his relationship with Uhura .
On Kirk 's recommendation , Jaylah is accepted into Starfleet Academy .
As the crew celebrates Kirk 's birthday , they watch the construction of their new ship , the USS Enterprise - A — and when the ship is completed , they resume their mission .
CAST
* Chris Pine as Captain James T. Kirk , commanding officer of the USS Enterprise * Zachary Quinto as Commander Spock , first officer and science officer * Karl Urban as Dr. Leonard " Bones " McCoy , chief medical officer * Simon Pegg as Montgomery " Scotty " Scott , second officer and chief engineer * Zoe Saldana as Lieutenant Nyota Uhura , communications officer
* John Cho as Hikaru Sulu , third officer and helmsman * Anton Yelchin as Pavel Chekov , the ship 's main navigator * Sofia Boutella as Jaylah , an alien scavenger * Idris Elba as Krall / Balthazar Edison , a powerful mutated alien warlord and the former captain of the USS Franklin
* Joe Taslim as Manas / Anderson Le , Krall 's henchman and second - in - command * Lydia Wilson as Kalara / Jessica Wolff , Krall 's henchwoman and scout
* Sara Forsberg as the alien voice - over * Deep Roy as Keenser ,
Scotty 's diminutive alien assistant * Melissa Roxburgh as Ensign Syl , an alien Enterprise crewmember
* Shohreh Aghdashloo as Commodore Paris , commanding officer of Starbase Yorktown * Greg Grunberg as Commander Finnegan
, Yorktown first officer * Danny Pudi as Fi'Ja
* Kim Kold as Zavanko * Anita Brown as Tyvanna * Doug Jung as Ben
* Dan Payne as Wadjet * Shea Whigham as the voice of Teenaxi Leader Section::::Cast .
Jeff Bezos appears as an alien Starfleet crew member .
Leonard Nimoy appears in two photo cameos as Spock Prime – individually , and alongside George Takei , Walter Koenig , William Shatner , James Doohan , DeForest Kelley , and Nichelle Nichols as the Prime versions of Sulu , Chekov , Kirk , Scott , McCoy , and Uhura , respectively .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Abrams returned only as a producer so he could focus on directing .
Writer - producer Roberto Orci was announced as director in May 2014 .
He would have been making his directorial debut .
However , in December , Orci 's role was also listed as a producer only , with Edgar Wright considered to replace him as director , along with a shortlist of others , including Rupert Wyatt , Morten Tyldum , Daniel Espinosa , Justin Lin and Duncan Jones .
Also , Star Trek actor and director Jonathan Frakes expressed interest in the job .
At the end of the month , Lin was announced as director of the third installment .
SCREENPLAY Section::::Screenplay .
In 2013 , Orci had begun writing the script with Patrick McKay and J. D. Payne , with Payne saying of the script in March , " We really want to get back to the sense of exploration and wonder .
The kind of optimistic sense of the future that Star Trek has always kind of had at its core .
It 's the Chicago Bulls in space , in terms of these people who are all awesome at their job . "
In January 2015 , after Orci 's departure as director , Simon Pegg and Doug Jung were hired to rewrite the screenplay , with Pegg saying on the previous draft , Paramount " had a script for Star Trek that was n't really working for them .
I think the studio was worried that it might have been a little bit too Star Trek - y .
" Pegg had been asked to make the new film " more inclusive " , stating that the solution was to " make a western or a thriller or a heist movie , then populate that with Star Trek characters
so it 's more inclusive to an audience that might be a little bit reticent .
"
CASTING Section::::Casting .
The first film 's major cast members signed on for two sequels as part of their original deals .
In 2014 , early in the film 's development , William Shatner said that he was contacted by producer Abrams to see if he would be interested in a possible role , but as the process continued and the script changed hands , the role never materialized .
Alice Eve was not included in the film despite her character having joined the Enterprise crew at the end of the last installment , because Pegg , in writing the script , did not have anything meaningful for her to do ; however , he stressed that Eve could appear in a later installment .
Joseph Gatt 's cyborg Science Officer 0718 was dropped from the film after a rewrite .
In March 2015 , Idris Elba was in early talks to play the villain , and he was confirmed for the role in the following months .
Pegg noted that the villain would be an original one , rather than a known antagonist from past stories in the Star Trek franchise .
In April , Sofia Boutella joined the cast in a lead role , and in early July , Deep Roy was confirmed to reprise his role of Keenser .
That month , Joe Taslim was added to the cast opposite Elba 's villain , and by August , Lydia Wilson joined as well .
In March 2016 , Shohreh Aghdashloo was cast as Admiral Paris for reshoots on the film .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography on the film began on June 25 , 2015 , in Vancouver , and Squamish , British Columbia , after several delays caused by multiple script rejections .
Additional filming locations were Seoul , South Korea , and Dubai , United Arab Emirates .
Principal filming ended on October 15 , 2015 .
In March 2016 , production underwent reshoots , with Aghdashloo added to the cast .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
In August 2015 , composer Michael Giacchino confirmed that he would return to write the score .
On June 26 , 2016 , singer Rihanna released a teaser across her social media accounts for a single for the film entitled " Sledgehammer " , and the song premiered the following day .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film was released in 2D , RealD3D , IMAX 3D and Barco Escape .
In August 2014 , it was announced that Paramount had pushed back the release of the film to 2016 , for the 50th anniversary celebration of the debut of Gene Roddenberry 's original sci - fi series .
In December , it was announced that the film was to be released on July 8 , 2016 .
In September 2015 , the film 's release date was pushed back to July 22 , 2016 .
The film was released in Dolby Cinema format in selected theaters .
The film had its Australian premiere in Sydney on July 7 .
MARKETING Section::::Marketing .
A teaser trailer for the film was released on December 14 , 2015 , and was criticized by some fans for focusing too much on action , and for featuring the Beastie Boys song " Sabotage " , which many considered out of place , despite its use in the first film of the rebooted series .
Pegg expressed similar thoughts of dissatisfaction with the teaser , saying that he " did n't love it " because " I know there 's a lot more to the film . "
He interpreted the trailer to be a way of the marketing team saying , " Come and see this movie !
It 's full of action and fun !
"
A second trailer was released on May 20 , 2016 , to warmer reviews .
A third and final trailer was released on June 27 , 2016 , featuring Rihanna 's single " Sledgehammer " .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Star Trek Beyond was released on Digital HD on October 4 , 2016 , and on Blu - ray and DVD on November 1 , 2016 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Star Trek
Beyond underperformed financially at the box office .
Scott Mendelson of Forbes observed that one factor contributing to the film 's underperformance was its untimely release in a crowded summer in which it was surrounded by other films like Ghostbusters , Jason Bourne and Suicide Squad .
He also noted that had Paramount released the film for the Star Treks 50th anniversary on September 8 , the film could have benefited from that occasion , as demonstrated in October 2012 when MGM released the James Bond film Skyfall ( which went on to gross over $ 1 billion ) for that series ' 50th anniversary .
Star Trek Beyond grossed $ 158.8 million in the United States and Canada and $ 184.6 million in other countries for a worldwide total of $ 343.5 million , against a production budget of $ 185 million .
It had a global opening of $ 89.2 million and an IMAX opening of $ 11.6 million on 571 IMAX screens .
Industry analyst Danny Cox had previously estimated that in order for the film to break even , it would have to earn $ 340–350 million worldwide , and ended losing an estimated $ 50.5 million .
NORTH AMERICA Section::::North America .
In the United States and Canada , the film was projected to gross $ 50–60 million from 3,928 theaters in its opening weekend .
It opened alongside and Lights Out , but critics noted that the film did not face any direct competition with them .
It opened across 3,928 theaters , of which 391 were IMAX .
It made $ 5.5 million from Thursday previews from 3,100 theaters , an improvement over its two immediate predecessors .
Of that , the film grossed $ 1.1 million on 387 IMAX screens .
This includes revenues generated from Wednesday night , when Paramount screened all Star Trek films , which concluded with a 10 pm screening of Beyond .
On its opening day , it earned $ 22.5 million , which is the second - biggest among the franchise , only behind Star Trek ( $ 30.9 million ) , the third - biggest opening day of the summer for a live - action film and the second - biggest opening day of the year for a non - comic book superhero live - action film , behind only The Jungle Book .
It earned $ 59.3 million in its opening weekend , which is the third - biggest debut among the franchise but the lowest of the reboot series ( behind Star Trek and Star Trek Into Darkness for both ) .
Adjusted for inflation , it ranks fourth behind the aforementioned films and ( $ 60 million ) .
It performed exceptionally well in IMAX making $ 8.7 million in 387 IMAX screens .
The film came in 14 % lower than the opening of its immediate predecessor , Star Trek Into Darkness , but box office experts noted that the fall was mild in comparison to other sequels of 2016 and is still considered a hit .
It dropped precipitously by 69 % on its second Friday and was overtaken by newcomer spy film Jason Bourne , earning $ 6.75 million .
By comparison , Star Trek dropped 56 % on its first Friday while Star Trek into Darkness fell 53 % .
However , this was not the worst Friday - to - Friday drop for a Star Trek film , as plunged 83 % on its second Friday due to negative word - of - mouth and heavy competition from .
By the second and third weekend following the film 's release , box office revenue continued to drop significantly due to the release of competing films like Jason Bourne and Suicide Squad .
OUTSIDE
NORTH AMERICA Section::::Outside North America .
Internationally , the film received a scattered release pattern and was released across approximately 76 markets .
It opened in 37 markets in conjunction with its North American release in its first weekend , including in the United Kingdom , Germany and Australia — territories where the franchise has traditionally performed well .
It earned a total of $ 30 million from the said number of markets which is slightly lower than Star Trek Into Darkness $ 31.7 million international debut in 2013 .
Paramount said that the heatwave in Europe negatively impacted the weekend 's results .
Beyond debuted at first place in 16 of them and recorded the biggest opening weekend ever for the franchise in 17 markets , including Russia , Taiwan and Thailand .
It debuted in third place overall at the international box office , behind Skiptrace and The Legend of Tarzan .
Beyond set numerous records in IMAX theaters .
Led by very strong results in the UK and Russia , it grossed an estimated weekend of $ 3.2 million on 184 screens besting Star Trek Into Darkness $ 2.8 million debut .
In its second weekend , it fell drastically by 57 % earning $ 13 million .
As a result , it slipped into sixth place at the box office .
After fluctuating up and down the charts , it finally topped the international box office in its seventh weekend due to a robust debut in China and remained at the top for the second weekend in a row .
The highest international tallies were recorded in the United Kingdom , Ireland and Malta ( $ 6.1 million ) , South Korea ( $ 5.6 million ) , Germany ( $ 4.5 million ) , Russia and the CIS ( $ 3.3 million ) , Australia ( $ 3 million ) , France ( $ 2.1 million ) , Mexico ( $ 1.5 million ) , Brazil ( $ 1.6 million ) , Venezuela ( $ 1.4 million ) and Taiwan ( $ 1 million ) .
In the United Kingdom , where the performance of the franchise has been consistently solid , it was edged out by the family film The BFG .
Its £ 4.74 million ( $ 6.2 million ) opening from 535 theaters is the lowest among the rebooted series and a 31 % decline from the £ 8.43 million ( $ 11 million ) opening posted by Star Trek Into Darkness , if previews are deducted .
The Guardian cited J. J. Abrams ' departure as the director and fans ' unenthusiastic response to Idris Elba as the villain ( in comparison to Benedict Cumberbatch in Star Trek Into Darkness ) as some possible reasons why the film failed to generate lucrative revenue .
The site also projected a total gross of around £ 20 million ( $ 26 million+ ) for the film .
It opened in China on September 2 , and earned an estimated $ 9.30 million on its opening day ( representing 66 % of the total marketplace ) , including $ 370,000 in midnight preview showings which is 160 % larger than the opening day of Star Trek Into Darkness and $ 21.8 million in two days .
In total , it had an opening weekend of $ 31.3 million ( per Paramount ) and $ 30.7 million ( according to Chinese box office service Ent Group ) from 6,259 screens , marking the biggest Star Trek debut in country which is 105 % bigger than the opening of Star Trek Into Darkness .
It was the only one of five new releases to make any impression on the chart .
It remained at the top of the box office for a second weekend by adding another $ 10.1 million ( according to Chinese data provider Ent Group ) , or $ 11.37 million ( according to Paramount ) from 5,830 locations from Friday to Sunday , a steep decline of 62.6 % from its previous weekend .
It fell out of the top 10 in its third weekend , and has grossed a total of $ 64.2 million there .
It is projected the film will end its run there anywhere around $ 70–100 million , a disappointing figure considering the robust marketing effort by investors Alibaba Pictures and Huahua Media .
Thus , the film is the second Paramount film to underperform in that corner following in July .
In terms of total earnings , its biggest offshore markets are the United Kingdom ( $ 13.3 million ) , Germany ( $ 8.6 million ) , Russia and the CIS ( $ 5.5 million ) and Australia ( $ 5.2 million ) .
Star Trek Beyond opened in Japan on October 21 , where it has earned $ 4.9 million as of 17 November 2016 .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 85 % based on 288 reviews , with an average rating of 7/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , "
Star Trek Beyond continues the franchise 's post - reboot hot streak with an epic sci - fi adventure that honors the series ' sci - fi roots without skimping on the blockbuster action .
"
On Metacritic , the film has a score of 68 out of 100 , based on 50 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A – " on an A+ to F scale , down from the first two films ' " A " .
Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun - Times gave the film 3 stars out of 4 and said , " Even with its big - screen pyrotechnics and its feature - length running time ,
Star Trek Beyond plays like an extended version of one of the better episodes from the original series , and I mean that in the best possible way . "
Scott Collura of IGN awarded the film 8.4/10 , describing it as being : " terrific , a fun and exciting entry in the series that balances subtle fan service while also feeling fresh and modern ; Star Trek Beyond is the perfect way to celebrate the series ' 50th anniversary . "
David Rooney of The Hollywood Reporter said the screenplay by Simon Pegg and Doug Jung " injects a welcome strain of humor that 's true to the original Gene Roddenberry creation , delivering nostalgia without stiff veneration " , and went on by saying , " While Beyond wo n't unseat 1982 's thrilling as the gold standard for Star Trek movies , it 's a highly entertaining entry guaranteed to give the franchise continuing life . "
Owen Gleiberman of Variety , in an otherwise positive review , described the film being : " a very familiar , old - fangled , no - mystery structure , and that 's because it 's basically the Star Trek version of an interplanetary action film , with a plot that does n't take you to many new frontiers . "
Furthermore , he called Star Trek Beyond " a somewhat diverting place holder , but one hopes that the next Star Trek movie will have what it takes to boldly go where no Star Trek movie has gone before . "
Mark Hugues of Forbes said , " Star Trek Beyond is the third - best Star Trek film of all time , creating the sort of emotional connection and familiar , powerful characterizations we loved in the original series while delivering top - notch action and the best Star Trek movie villain since First Contacts Borg Queen . "
Despite its international success , Star Trek Beyond was met by critics who were less taken with the film .
Kyle Smith of the New York Post gave the film 1½ stars out of 4 and he commented that the filmmakers " should have called it Star Trek Into Drowsiness . "
Smith later added , " Beyond is tepid when it 's trying to be emotional , moronic when it 's trying to be thrilling and unfunny when it 's trying to be non - unfunny .
It lacks a storytelling module :
Things just click into place when needed , as when Kirk commands Scotty to rev up a busted old spaceship , Scott says it 's impossible , and
14 seconds later everything is ready to rip .
"
James Berardinelli of Reelviews gave 2½ stars out of 4 , writing : "
Star Trek Beyond is a Star Trek movie , although not an especially good one ; The action sequences are frenetic , kinetic , and at times incoherent .
This is n't unexpected ; it 's Lin 's trademark .
But the plot , credited to Simon Pegg & Doug Jung , is pure Trek .
Unfortunately , it 's also instantly forgettable . "
Dave Robinson of outlet Crash Landed writes that " Star Trek Beyond fails to push beyond its own roots and becomes just another very safe sci - fi popcorn movie in an increasingly crowded market , that will likely have you leaving the theatre feeling exactly as you entered . "
Chris Nashawaty of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a C+ and wrote , " [ w]ith Beyond , it feels like just another summer tentpole with not enough going on underneath the tent . "
ACCOLADES SEQUEL Section::::Sequel .
Pine and Quinto have signed contracts to return as Kirk and Spock for a fourth film should one be made .
In July 2016 , Abrams confirmed plans for a fourth film and stated that Chris Hemsworth would return as Kirk 's father , George , whom he played in the prologue of the first film .
Later that month , Paramount confirmed the return of Hemsworth , as well as most of the Beyond cast , producers Abrams and Lindsey Weber , and writers J. D. Payne and Patrick McKay .
That same month , Abrams said that Chekov would not be recast , after Anton Yelchin died in an accident outside his residence in California .
In December 2017 , it was revealed that Quentin Tarantino had pitched an idea for a potential Star Trek film to Abrams and Paramount , who were reportedly enthusiastic about the idea .
Tarantino was mentioned as a possibility to direct the film if his schedule allowed , and that Abrams and Paramount would attempt to assemble a writer 's room to explore the idea .
On December 22 , writer Mark L. Smith was hired by Paramount and Bad Robot to write a screenplay based on Tarantino 's original pitch , with Tarantino still expected to direct .
In April 2018 , it was announced that two new Star Trek films are in development at Paramount .
Later that month , it was announced that S. J. Clarkson will direct the second Star Trek film in development , and that the film will enter production before Tarantino 's film .
J. D. Payne and Patrick McKay will co - write the screenplay , while Abrams and Lindsey Weber will co - produce the project .
In August 2018 , however , Pine and Hemsworth walked away from negotiations to star in the film after refusing to take pay cuts as a result of Star Trek Beyonds underperformance .
SEE ALSO
* List of films featuring space stations
* List of films featuring extraterrestrials
* List of science fiction films of the 2010s
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Official database website