WAR FOR THE PLANET OF THE APES War for the Planet of the Apes is a 2017 American science fiction film directed by Matt Reeves and written by Mark Bomback and Reeves .
A sequel to Rise of the Planet of the Apes ( 2011 ) and Dawn of the Planet of the Apes ( 2014 ) , it is the third installment in the Planet of the Apes reboot series .
The film stars Andy Serkis , Woody Harrelson and Steve Zahn , and follows a confrontation between the apes , led by Caesar , and the humans for control of Earth .
Like its predecessor , its premise shares several similarities to the fifth film in the original series , Battle for the Planet of the Apes , but it is not a direct remake .
Principal photography began on October 14 , 2015 , in Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada .
War for the Planet of the Apes premiered in New York City on July 10 , 2017 , and was theatrically released in the United States on July 14 , 2017 , by 20th Century Fox .
The film has grossed over $ 490 million and received critical praise , with many reviewers highlighting the performances ( particularly Serkis 's ) , visual effects , story , direction , and musical score .
The film received a nomination for Best Special Visual Effects at the 71st British Academy Film Awards , and was also nominated for Best Visual Effects at the 90th Academy Awards .
It was also nominated for four Saturn Awards , including Best Director for Reeves and Best Actor for Serkis .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Two years after the misanthropic bonobo Koba attacked the human survivors in San Francisco , Caesar and his tribe of intelligent apes have been forced against a rogue U.S. military faction known as Alpha - Omega led by a ruthless colonel .
Alpha - Omega employs other apes formerly loyal to Koba , derogatorily called " donkeys " .
An Alpha - Omega platoon launches an attack on an ape outpost , but it fails and four soldiers , including one named Preacher and a " donkey " gorilla named Red , are captured .
Caesar releases the soldiers , hoping the display of mercy will show the Colonel that the apes are not savages ; Red escapes by injuring the albino gorilla Winter .
Later , Caesar 's eldest son Blue Eyes and lieutenant Rocket return from a long journey .
Blue Eyes reports that they found a place across the desert that is ideal for the apes .
Despite an uneasy Winter asserting that the apes should leave immediately , Caesar decides they need to prepare first .
That night , the Colonel leads a team of soldiers in infiltrating the apes ' home , killing Blue Eyes and Caesar 's wife Cornelia ; Caesar unsuccessfully attempts to prevent the Colonel 's escape .
Afterward , the apes are unable to find Winter , who they believe betrayed them out of fear .
In the morning , the tribe gathers to journey to safety .
Leaving his youngest son , Cornelius , in the care of Blue Eyes ' wife Lake , Caesar departs to exact revenge while serving as the decoy for the other apes .
Accompanied by Rocket , his orangutan adviser Maurice , and his gorilla lieutenant Luca , the apes enter a seemingly abandoned village , where they come upon a soldier who deserted the Colonel 's army .
Caesar kills him in self - defense .
They then discover a mute girl , who Maurice befriends and adopts , giving her a small rag doll .
They then find Winter at a beachside military camp , having become a " donkey " .
They confront Winter , who tells Caesar that the Colonel departed for the border , to meet more soldiers .
Winter then attempts to call out for help , but the other apes restrain him , and Caesar accidentally suffocates him .
While following the military , the apes discover soldiers who have been shot and left for dead .
Their examination of a surviving soldier reveals that he is mute like the girl .
Caesar then kills him in an act of mercy .
Later , the apes give chase after a hooded figure who stole one of their horses and are surprised to discover he is an intelligent ape from another zoo , named Bad Ape .
While camping with Bad Ape , they discover that he knows where the border is
and he hesitantly agrees to lead them there .
The group reaches the border , where they see a quarantine facility .
While attempting to get a closer look , Luca is killed protecting Caesar from some soldiers .
Enraged , Caesar decides to proceed alone rather than continue to endanger his allies .
While there , however , Caesar learns that Alpha - Omega captured his tribe and are forcing them to build a wall without food or water .
Caesar is then captured by Red , who brings him to the Colonel .
He is forced to work with the other apes , and when he inspires them to stop working , the Colonel threatens to kill Caesar to get the apes to continue .
Caesar deduces that the Colonel is barricading the facility to fend off other military forces who are against him for killing his own soldiers .
The Colonel informs Caesar that the Simian Flu virus had mutated , and the human carriers subsequently became mute and devolved into a primitive state .
He then has Caesar tortured with starvation to force the other apes to work .
The mute girl , named Nova by Maurice , sneaks into the facility to give Caesar food , water , and her rag doll .
To prevent her from being discovered , Rocket allows himself to be captured as a diversion .
The next day , the Colonel comes to see if Caesar is still alive , and confiscates the doll upon discovering it .
Together , Caesar and Rocket are able to work out a means of escape via an underground tunnel leading out of the facility .
Though the plan is successful , Caesar remains behind to confront the Colonel as the facility is attacked by remnants of the military .
Finding the Colonel infected by the virus from contact with Nova 's doll , Caesar chooses not to kill him , instead watching him commit suicide .
The escaping apes are caught in the crossfire between the two armies while Red watches uncertainly .
Caesar attempts to blow up a large fuel tank to take out the Alpha - Omega forces from behind , but he is shot with a crossbow by Preacher .
Red then uses a grenade launcher to kill Preacher , saving Caesar 's life , before he is killed by a soldier .
Caesar succeeds in blowing up the tank and escapes the facility as it is destroyed in a chain reaction , resulting in an avalanche that wipes out the military .
The apes , carrying Nova , all survive by climbing nearby trees .
They then cross the desert to find an oasis .
While the other apes celebrate their new home , Maurice discovers Caesar 's fatal wound .
He promises to tell Cornelius who his father was and what he did for the apes .
Caesar then dies peacefully while Maurice mourns his death and the other apes look on .
CAST APES * Andy Serkis as Caesar , an intelligent common chimpanzee who is leader to a tribe of genetically enhanced apes .
* Steve Zahn as " Bad Ape " , a common chimpanzee who lived in a zoo before the Simian Flu outbreak , and was a hermit before joining Caesar 's group .
* Karin Konoval as Maurice , a Bornean orangutan who is Caesar 's loyal adviser and friend .
* Terry Notary as Rocket , a common chimpanzee who is Caesar 's brother - figure .
* Ty Olsson as Red , a Western lowland gorilla who was once a follower of Koba , now serving the Colonel to defeat Caesar .
Olsson previously played Chief Hamill in Rise .
* Michael Adamthwaite as Luca , a Western lowland gorilla in Caesar 's tribe .
Luca was previously played by Scott Lang in Dawn .
* Toby Kebbell as Koba , a bonobo who had previously waged war against the humans in Dawn ; he now appears in Caesar 's hallucinations .
* Judy Greer as Cornelia , Caesar 's wife .
* Sara Canning as Lake , a common chimpanzee in Caesar 's tribe , who is also Blue Eyes ' mate and later Cornelius 's caretaker .
* Max Lloyd - Jones as Blue Eyes , Caesar and Cornelia 's oldest son .
* Devyn Dalton as Cornelius , Caesar and Cornelia 's youngest son , and Blue Eyes ' younger brother .
Dalton previously played Cornelia in Rise .
* Aleks Paunovic as Winter , an albino Western lowland gorilla in Caesar 's tribe who sided with the Colonel out of fear .
HUMANS
* Woody Harrelson as The Colonel , the leader of the paramilitary organization Alpha - Omega , who is obsessed with wiping out Caesar and his tribe to preserve humans as the dominant species .
* Amiah Miller as Nova , a mute orphan whom Maurice befriends and cares for .
* Gabriel Chavarria as Preacher , a human soldier working under the Colonel in Alpha - Omega .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
After seeing his cut of Dawn , 20th Century Fox and Chernin Entertainment signed Matt Reeves to return as director for a third installment of the reboot series .
In January 2014 , the studio announced the third film , with Reeves returning to direct and co - write along with Bomback , and Peter Chernin , Rick Jaffa and Amanda Silver serving as producers .
During an interview in mid - November 2014 with MTV , Andy Serkis said they did not know the next film 's setting . " ...
It could be five years after the event .
It could be the night after the events of where we left ' Dawn . '
" In May 2015 , the title was first given as War of the Planet of the Apes .
By October 2015 , it had been retitled as War for the Planet of the Apes .
When director Reeves and screenwriter Bomback came on board to helm Dawn , the film already had a release date , which led to an accelerated production schedule .
However , with the third installment , Fox wanted to give the duo plenty of time to write and make the film .
Taking advantage of this , the two bonded with each other more than before .
In interviews for Dawn , Reeves talked about the inevitable war Caesar would have with the humans : "
As this story continues , we know that war is not avoided by the end of Dawn .
That is going to take us into the world of what he is grappling with .
Where he is going to be thrust into circumstances that he never , ever wanted to deal with , and was hoping he could avoid .
And now he is right in the middle of it .
The things that happen in that story test him in huge ways , in the ways in which his relationship with Koba haunts him deeply .
It 's going to be an epic story .
I think you 've probably read that I sort of described it where in the first film was very much about his rise from humble beginnings to being a revolutionary .
The second movie was about having to rise to the challenge of being a great leader in the most difficult of times .
This is going to be the story that is going to cement his status as a seminal figure in ape history , and sort of leads to an almost biblical status .
He is going to become like a mythic ape figure , like Moses . "
Toby Kebbell , who portrayed Koba in Dawn , had expressed interest in reprising his role or performing as other characters .
Plans to include Koba in a larger role in the film were abandoned early , with Bomback saying , " If you stayed until the very end of Dawn of the Planet of the Apes , you hear Koba 's breathing .
We did that to give us a tiny crack of a possibility that we could revive Koba if we wanted to .
Very early on in spitballing , we realized there was nothing more to do with Koba – certainly nothing that would exceed what he had done in the last story .
But we knew we wanted to keep him alive as an idea .
In playing out the reality of what happened at the end of the last film , Caesar would be traumatized by having to kill his brother .
That would have resonance , and we wanted to make sure that did not get lost .
So the answer was that we could go inside Caesar 's mind at this point and revisit Koba that way . "
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
In August 2015 , Deadline reported that Gabriel Chavarria had been cast as one of the humans in the film .
In September 2015 , The Hollywood Reporter announced that Woody Harrelson had been cast as the film 's antagonist , and that Chavarria 's role was supporting .
In October 2015 , TheWrap reported that Steve Zahn was cast as a new ape in the film .
It was also announced that actress Amiah Miller was cast as one of the film 's humans , with Judy Greer and Karin Konoval reprising their roles as Cornelia and Maurice , while Aleks Paunovic and Sara Canning were cast as new apes .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography on the film began on October 14 , 2015 in the Lower Mainland in Vancouver , under the working title Hidden Fortress .
Filming was expected to take place there until early March 2016 .
Parts of the film were expected to shoot for up to five days in the Kananaskis in late January and early February .
In March , Serkis confirmed that he had finished shooting his portions .
VISUAL EFFECTS Section::::Visual effects .
As with Rise and Dawn , the visual effects for War were created by Weta Digital ; the apes were created with a mixture of motion - capture and CGI key - frame animation , as they were performed in motion - capture technology and animated in CGI .
INFLUENCES Section::::Influences .
At New York Comic - Con 2016 , Reeves explained that he and Bomback were influenced by many films before writing .
He said , " One of the first things that Mark and I did because we had just finished Dawn was that we decided to watch a million movies .
We decided to do what people fantasize what Hollywood screenwriters get to do but no one actually does .
We got Fox to give us a theater and we watched movie after movie .
We watched every Planet of the Apes movie , war movies , westerns , Empire Strikes Back ...
We just thought , ' We have to pretend we have all the time in the world , ' even though we had limited time .
We got really inspired . "
Additionally , during production , Reeves and Bomback sought broader inspirations from films like The Bridge on the River Kwai and The Great Escape .
Feeling that there was a need to imbue Biblical themes and elements , they also watched Biblical epics like Ben - Hur and The Ten Commandments .
The influences and inspirations were made evident in the relationship between Caesar and Woody Harrelson 's Colonel , a military leader with pretensions toward godhood .
Reeves has compared their relationship to the dynamic between Alec Guinness 's British Commander and Sessue Hayakawa 's prison camp Colonel in Bridge on the River Kwai .
Another comparison is in Caesar 's journey to find the Colonel , flanked by a posse of close friends – a situation Reeves explicitly tied to Clint Eastwood 's war - weary soldier in The Outlaw Josey Wales .
Influences from the film
Apocalypse Now , notably Harrelson 's character and his Alpha - Omega faction being similar to Colonel Kurtz 's renegade army , were also noted by several journalists .
Harrelson has also acknowledged the similarities and inspiration .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
On October 17 , 2015 , it was confirmed that Michael Giacchino , the composer and writer of the soundtrack for Dawn , would return to compose Wars score .
The soundtrack was digitally released to iTunes and Amazon on July 7 , 2017 , and in its physical form by Sony Masterworks on July 21 , 2017 .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film was initially set for a July 29 , 2016 , release .
However , in January 2015 , Fox postponed the film 's release date to about a year later on July 14 , 2017 .
MARKETING Section::::Marketing .
Special behind - the - scenes footage for the film was aired on TV on November 22 , 2015 , as part of a contest announcement presented by director Matt Reeves and Andy Serkis .
The footage aired during The Walking Dead on AMC .
The announcement allowed winners to wear a performance - capture suit and appear in a scene as an ape .
The announcement was released on 20th Century Fox 's official YouTube page later the same day .
At a New York Comic Con special event on October 6 , Reeves , Serkis and producer Dylan Clark debuted an exclusive look at the film .
Serkis has also mentioned that the film would be accompanied by a video game , for which he performed motion capture .
Titled , the game was released for the PlayStation 4 , Xbox One and PC in fall 2017 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
War for the Planet of the Apes was released on Digital HD on October 10 , 2017 , and on Blu - ray and DVD on October 24 , 2017 by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
War for the Planet of the Apes grossed $ 146.9 million in the United States and Canada and $ 343.8 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 490.7 million , against a production budget of $ 150 million .
In North America , the film was projected to gross $ 50–60 million in its opening weekend , however , given its acclaimed status and strong word - of - mouth , rival studios
believed the film had the potential to debut as high as $ 70–80 million .
War was closely monitored by analysts while the summer was witnessing a decline in ticket sales , a situation that they blamed on franchise fatigue for an overabundance of sequels and reboots ( such as , and The Mummy ) .
However , box office analysts noted that well - reviewed films have tended to perform in - line with estimates ( Guardians of the Galaxy Vol .
2 , Wonder Woman and ) .
The film grossed $ 5 million from Thursday night previews at 3,021 theaters , up 22 % from the $ 4.1 million earned by its predecessor , and $ 22.1 million on its first day .
It went on to debut to $ 56.3 million , topping the box office , albeit with a 22 % drop from Dawns $ 72.6 million debut .
In its second weekend , the film grossed $ 20.9 million ( a drop of 62.9 % , more than the 50.4 % fall Dawn saw ) , finishing 4th at the box office .
In its third weekend , the film made $ 10.5 million ( dropping another 49.9 % ) , finishing 6th at the box office .
It was lower than the third weeks of both Rise ( $ 16.1 million ) and Dawn ( $ 16.8 million ) .
Outside North America , War for the Planet of the Apes received a scattered release in a span of three months ( July – September ) .
The film began its release in about a third of the marketplace on July 14 , albeit only in two major markets , and was projected to have an opening of $ 50–60 million , with the potential to go higher if smaller Asian markets over - perform , as they have for recent tent poles .
The film ended up having an international debut of $ 44.2 million , including $ 9.27 million in the United Kingdom .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
War for the Planet of the Apes received praise for the cast 's performances ( particularly Serkis 's ) , Reeves 's direction , visual effects , musical score , cinematography and its morally complex storyline .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 93 % based on 323 reviews , with a rating average of 8.2/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " War for the Planet of the Apes combines breathtaking special effects and a powerful , poignant narrative to conclude this rebooted trilogy on a powerful – and truly blockbuster – note . "
On review aggregator Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average rating to reviews , the film has a score of 82 out of 100 , based on 50 critics , indicating " universal acclaim " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A – " on an A+ to F scale , the same score earned by its two immediate predecessors .
Scott Collura of IGN awarded the film a score of 9.5 out of 10 , saying : " War for the Planet of the Apes is an excellent closing act to this rebooted trilogy , but also one that does enough world - building that the series can potentially continue from here – and it 's a rare case where , after three movies , we 're left wanting more . "
A.O. Scott of The New York Times said of the film , " " War for the Planet of the Apes , " directed by Matt Reeves , is the grimmest episode so far , and also the strongest , a superb example — rare in this era of sloppily constructed , commercially hedged cinematic universes — of clear thinking wedded to inventive technique in popular filmmaking , " and lauded Andy Serkis 's performance in the film , stating that " Andy Serkis 's performance as Caesar is one of the marvels of modern screen acting . "
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film 3.5 out of 4 stars , and said that Serkis performed " with a resonant power and depth of feeling that 's nearly Shakespearean .
Oscar , get busy :
Serkis deserves the gold , " and went on to say that " War for the Planet of the Apes – No . 9 in the simian cinema canon – is the best of the Apes films since the 1968 original . "
Eric Kohn of Indiewire gave the film a B+ rating , and praised Matt Reeves 's directing , saying " It 's a given that an expensive 21st century sci - fi movie with talking animals , exploding tanks , and jarring machine guns would look and sound great , but Reeves applies these effects with such a measured strategy that they 're always working in service of a greater narrative agenda .
"
Kohn went on to applaud the visuals and musical score , stating that " The breathlessly paced montage of flying bullets and angry monkeys raining down on terrified men , aided by Michael Giacchino 's vibrant score , is a strong indicator of the next - level craftsmanship that distinguishes these movies from so many cacophonous Hollywood spectacles ; not only is the action easy to follow , but you care for the motion - captured characters at the center of it , while the humans cower in fear . "
ACCOLADES Best Original Score
Best Sound Best Visual Effects rowspan="7 " Visual Effects
Society Awards
rowspan="7
" February 13 , 2018
Outstanding Visual Effects in a Photoreal Feature Joe Letteri ,
Ryan Stafford , Daniel Barrett , Dan Lemmon POSSIBLE
FOURTH FILM
Section::::Possible fourth film .
In October 2016 , it was reported that a fourth Planet of the Apes film was being discussed .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS