THE AFFAIR ( TV SERIES )
The Affair is an American television drama series created by Sarah Treem and Hagai Levi .
The series premiered on Showtime on October 12 , 2014 .
A TV-14 version of the pilot episode was made available online beginning on October 6 , 2014 , via YouTube , SHO.com , and several other on - demand formats .
A 12-episode second season of The Affair premiered on October 4 , 2015 .
On December 9 , 2015 , the series was renewed for a third season , which debuted on November 20 , 2016 .
On January 9 , 2017 , Showtime renewed the series for a fourth season , which premiered on June 17 , 2018 .
On July 26 , 2018 , Showtime announced it had renewed the series for a fifth and final season to debut in 2019 .
The 10-episode fifth season , featuring several cast changes , will partly take place 20 - 30 years after the events of season four , featuring Anna Paquin as an adult Joanie Lockhart .
The series won the Golden Globe Award for Best Television Series – Drama and Ruth Wilson won for Best Actress – Television Series Drama at the 72nd Golden Globe Awards in 2015 .
At the 73rd Golden Globe Awards in 2016 , Maura Tierney won the award for Best Supporting Actress .
SERIES OVERVIEW
Section::::Series overview .
The Affair explores the emotional effects of an extramarital relationship between Noah Solloway and Alison Lockhart ( Dominic West and Ruth Wilson ) after they casually meet at the diner where Alison works .
The show begins with the Solloway family packing up the family van to stay in the resort town of Montauk , New York .
Noah is happily married with four children , but he resents their dependence on his wealthy father - in - law .
Alison is a local waitress trying to piece her life and marriage back together in the wake of her young son 's tragic accidental death at the age of four .
The story of the affair is depicted from Noah 's and Alison 's perspectives respectively , complete with memory bias which often results in vastly different scenarios .
Each episode has two parts , one as remembered by Noah , the other by Alison .
Noah 's perspective is of a vibrant , playful , and sexy Alison who comes on to him , while her perspective is more cautious , reserved , with a dulled conservative sense of self , and Noah coming on to her .
In the second season , the narrative is expanded to include the perspectives of Noah and Alison 's original spouses , Helen Solloway and Cole Lockhart ( Maura Tierney and Joshua Jackson ) , as they all move forward with the dissolution of their marriages and deal with the ramifications .
The subsequent death of Alison 's brother - in - law , Scott ( Colin Donnell ) , and the ensuing police investigation and criminal trial , are explored in flashforward scenes at the end of most episodes .
The third season is set three years later , following the culmination of the flashforward trial scenes , after Noah is released from prison .
Season 3 introduces an occasional perspective , Juliette Le Gall ( Irène Jacob ) , Noah 's new love interest .
In the fourth season , Noah has moved to Los Angeles to be closer to his younger children Trevor ( Jadon Sand ) and Stacey ( Abigail Dylan Harrison ) , as Helen and Vik ( Omar Metwally ) have moved there .
Cole and Luisa ( Catalina Sandino Moreno ) are living together in Montauk , while Alison is working as a grief counselor .
Season 4 features opening flashforward sequences , featuring Noah and Cole , in its first four episodes , which ultimately lead to the discovery of Alison 's death .
The fifth season will take place in two different time frames : a present - day storyline including Noah , Helen , and their four children and the other decades later featuring a now - adult Joanie Lockhart ( Anna Paquin ) returning to Montauk to find out the truth about her mother 's death .
EPISODES
CAST
MAIN CAST
RECURRING CAST
* Victor Williams as Detective Jeffries ( seasons 1–2 , 4 ) * John Doman as Bruce Butler , Helen 's father ( seasons 1–3 , 5 ) * Kathleen Chalfant as Margaret Butler , Helen 's mother ( seasons 1–3 , 5 ) * Mare Winningham as Cherry Lockhart , Cole 's mother ( seasons 1–2 , 4 )
* Colin Donnell as Scott Lockhart , Cole 's brother ( seasons 1–2 ) * Danny Fischer as Hal Lockhart , Cole 's brother ( seasons 1–4 )
* Michael Godere as Caleb Lockhart , Cole 's brother ( seasons 1–4 ) * Kaija Matiss as Mary - Kate Lockhart , Hal 's wife ( seasons 1–2 , 4 ) * Deirdre O'Connell as Athena Bailey , Alison 's mother ( seasons 1–2 , 4 )
* Darren Goldstein as Oscar Hodges , owner of The Lobster Roll ( seasons 1–4 )
* Nicolette Robinson as Jane , waitress at The Lobster Roll ( seasons 1–2 , 4 )
* Stephen Kunken as Harry , a publisher ( seasons 1–2 ) * Lynn Cohen as Joan Bailey , Alison 's grandmother ( season 1 ) * Jennifer Esposito as Nina Solloway , Noah 's sister ( seasons 2–3 )
* Richard Schiff as Jon Gottlief , Noah 's attorney ( season 2 )
* Joanna Gleason as Yvonne , a publisher who , along with her husband Robert , owns the guest house in which Alison and Noah stay ( season 2 )
* Peter Friedman as Robert , Yvonne 's husband ( season 2 )
* Abigail Dylan Harrison as Stacey Solloway , Noah and Helen 's youngest daughter ( seasons 3–5 ) * Brendan Fraser as John Gunther , a prison guard ( season 3 ) * Reagan and Savannah Grella as Joanie , Alison and Cole 's daughter ( seasons 3–4 )
* Christopher Meyer as Anton Gatewood , an intelligent student at the school where Noah teaches ( season 4 )
* Russell Hornsby as Carl Gatewood , Janelle 's ex - husband and Anton 's father ( seasons 4–5 )
* Emily Browning as Sierra , Helen and Vik 's neighbor ( seasons 4–5 ) * Ramon Rodriguez as Ben Cruz , a Marine veteran and Alison 's love interest ( season 4 )
* Zenobia Shroff as Priya Ullah , Vik 's mother ( season 4 )
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
On February 8 , 2013 , it was announced that Showtime had ordered a pilot for The Affair .
The network officially picked up the series on January 16 , 2014 , with a 10-episode order .
On November 10 , 2014 , Showtime renewed the series for a 10-episode second season ; however , it was later changed to 12 .
On December 9 , 2015 , the series was renewed for a third season .
On January 9 , 2017 , Showtime renewed the series for a fourth season .
On July 26 , 2018 , Showtime announced it had renewed the series for a fifth and final season .
After the conclusion of the fourth season and prior to the start of production on the fifth and final season , several series regulars departed the series .
Ruth Wilson requested to leave ahead of season four , and her character was killed off at the end of the season .
Joshua Jackson , Catalina Sandino Moreno and Omar Metwally also will not return as series regulars for the final season .
RECEPTION
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Rotten TomatoesMetacriticRotten Tomatoes , the season has a rating of 90 % , based on 50 reviews , with an average rating of 8.18/10 .
The consensus reads : "
Thanks to some smart , creative storytelling and spectacular performances , The Affair is a somber , bewitching exploration of truth and desire . "
On Metacritic , the first season has a score of 85 out of 100 , based on 28 reviews , indicating " universal acclaim " .
The second season received continued positive reviews from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the season has a rating of 90 % , based on 21 reviews , with an average rating of 8.04/10 .
The consensus reads : " The Affair shifts its emphasis in season two , moving psychological drama to the foreground and expanding the show 's central crime story to include two new points of view . "
On Metacritic , it has a score of 78 out of 100 based on 15 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Gwen Ihnat of The A.V. Club gave it an " A- " grade and wrote that " With its bold new move to double our number of perspectives , it appears that The Affair will sail over that sophomore slump that has felled so many other Showtime dramas .
The third season received continued positive reviews from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the season has a rating of 79 % , based on 19 reviews , with an average rating of 7.67/10 .
The consensus reads : "
The Affair adds to its cast of strong characters and deepens the mood , tension , and intrigue , even if the plot sometimes struggles to move forward . "
On Metacritic , it has a score of 72 out of 100 based on 8 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
The fourth season received continued positive reviews from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the season has a rating of 90 % , based on 21 reviews , with an average rating of 7.8/10 .
The consensus reads : " The Affairs captivating character study returns with fewer kinks than its previous outing , resulting in a more emotionally grounded season that regains much of the show 's initial allure . " AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Association !
Category !
Nominee(s ) !
Result
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The first season was released on DVD in region 1 on August 4 , 2015 .
The set contains all 10 episodes , plus special features , including character profiles and costume featurettes .
The second season was released on DVD in region 1 on August 16 , 2016 .
The third season was released on DVD in region 1 on April 25 , 2017 .
INTERNATIONAL BROADCAST Section::::International broadcast .
In Canada , the series premiered simultaneously with the American broadcast on October 12 , 2014 , and airs on Movie Central and The Movie Network .
The series premiered on Showcase in Australia on February 10 , 2015 .
Sky Atlantic bought the rights to air The Affair in the UK with season one beginning in May 2015 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS