MINA SAYWHAT
Mina SayWhat Llona is an American radio and TV personality .
Currently on air on Philadelphia 's legendary urban radio station WUSL - Power 99 .
Mina grew up in Union City/ Jersey City , New Jersey .
She started her radio career at the age of 18 while living in New York and attending Syracuse University .
Mina graduated cum laude from Syracuse University with a dual major in Television , Radio and Film from the S.I. Newhouse School of Public Communication and Political Science .
She also minored in Music Business .
Mina worked for Sirius XM Radio for 4 years prior to working at Power 99 .
She has conducted interviews with big names in music such as Kanye West , Usher and Nas .
Currently , Mina SayWhat is also the voice of the weather for 103.5 The Beat in Miami .
She is an ambassador for the Philadelphia 76ers ' community outreach program , " Sixer 's Strong , " and works with the 76ers ' Latino youth basketball league " La Liga Del Barrio .
" La Liga Del Barrio is open for boys and girls ( ages 6 – 17 ) and consists of 28 teams .
RADIO CAREER
Section::::Radio career .
Mina SayWhat has many career highlights .
Some memorable conversations would include her talk with Nas where he opens up for the first time about why he chose to put his ex - wife , Kelis ' , wedding dress on his album cover
" Life is Good " .
Lupe Fiasco created an uproar after his talk with Mina when he criticized President Obama 's war ethics .
On April 7 , 2013 Ace Hood opened up about his family and revealed that he decided to go a different musical route with his album " Trials and Tribulations " .
ASAP Rocky announced his " Long Live ASAP " album release in detail with Mina SayWhat .
Meek Mill also created some headlines when addressed Kendrick Lamar 's diss with Mina .
After Kendrick Lamar 's verse on Big Sean 's Control was released , the whole hip hop community was up in arms about Kendrick calling everyone out and saying he 's the king .
Meek Mill exclusively responded to these claims by telling Mina , " He can run the backpack , Imma run these streets .
" While promoting his " Seen It
All " album , Young Jeezy discussed assumptions that his album cover plays homage to the " Illuminati " and also detailed why he rapped about his labels ' , Def Jam , lack of support on his song " Me Ok " .
COLLEGE RADIO Section::::College Radio .
Mina received a full academic scholarship to attend Syracuse University .
She started as a Political Science major and picked up a communications major in the first semester after becoming involved with the college radio station WJPZ - FM Z89.1 .
Her experience at the station made her decided she wanted to pursue a career in radio .
Mina decided to dual major in Television , Radio & Film at the very respected S. I. Newhouse School of Public Communications and also had a Music Business minor in the College Of Visual & Performing Arts both at Syracuse University .
At WJPZ , she started with a Friday night on air shift and eventually got her own daily show 2p-6p .
She eventually became the stations Vice President Of Programming overseeing a staff of 150 people .
In addition to that , Mina interned at 2 radio stations .
One as the On - Air / Promotion Intern at WWHT Hot 107.9 Syracuse .
Another as the Programming Intern at WQHT
Hot 97 New York .
SIRIUS XM Section::::SIRIUS XM .
Upon graduating from Syracuse University at the age of 22 , Mina was hired by the programming department at Sirius Satellite Radio .
Three months after being hired , Sirius Satellite Radio merged with XM Satellite Radio to create Sirius XM Radio with a combined 22 million subscribers at the time .
After the merger tension settled , Mina SayWhat surfaced on - air on the hip hop / r&b channel
The Heat ( Sirius XM ) .
Mina created , produced and hosted " The Warm Up " , the new music show on The Heat ( Sirius XM ) .
Mina also hosted the channels weekend countdown .
While on her show , Mina conducted R&B artist Elle Varner 's first radio interview and broke records , such as Miguel 's " Adorn " which eventually snowballed to become a # 1 chart topping , Grammy Award winning song .
After the merger on the radio programming side Mina was promoted .
She programmed the channel Sirius XM Love and the holiday channel " ' Sirius XM Holly " ' .
Mina aided in the programming of ' 80s on 8 on Sirius XM and worked with all 4 original MTV VJ 's Mark Goodman , Martha Quinn , Nina Blackwood and Alan Hunter ( VJ ) .
She was also the Music Director and Social Media Manager for The Heat .
POWER
99 PHILLY Section::::Power 99 Philly .
Mina 's currently broadcasts on the legendary urban radio station WUSL in Philadelphia .
She was recruited to join their morning show as an on - air host and oversee the digital and social media efforts for the urban Clear Channel Communications radio stations in Philly .
Beginning there at the age of 25 , Mina is the youngest female radio personality to ever host morning drive in Philly .
Since joining mornings the shows ratings have reached # 1 .
She also founded an all girls dance team , the Power Squad , which she currently leads and Mina also hosts a new artist showcase called " Next On Deck . "
TV Section::::TV .
Mina has been featured on Fox News Channel in Philly and was also featured on NBC News .
MINASAYWHAT.COM
Section::::MinaSayWhat.com .
Mina launched her own website " www.minasaywhat.com " in April 2011 .
The site features her interviews , events , highlights , music blogging , and breaking entertainment news .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
The Source Magazine 's Power 30 Radio DJ 's List Cover Of Syracuse Magazine John Bayliss Radio Scholar Philadelphia 76ers Ambassador REFERENCES