INFERNO ( 2016 FILM )
Inferno is a 2016 American action mystery thriller film directed by Ron Howard and written by David Koepp , based on the 2013 novel of the same name by Dan Brown .
The film is the sequel to The Da Vinci Code ( 2006 ) and Angels & Demons ( 2009 ) , and is the third installment in the Robert Langdon film series .
It stars Tom Hanks , reprising his role as Robert Langdon , alongside Felicity Jones , Omar Sy , Sidse Babett Knudsen , Ben Foster , and Irrfan Khan .
Together with the previous film , it remains Hanks ' only live - action sequel .
Filming began on April 27 , 2015 , in Venice , Italy , and wrapped on July 21 , 2015 , in Budapest .
The film premiered in Florence on October 9 , 2016 , and was released in the United States on October 28 , 2016 , ten years after release of The Da Vinci Code , in 2D and IMAX formats .
The film received generally negative reviews from critics and grossed $ 220 million against a production budget of $ 75 million .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Harvard University professor Robert Langdon awakens in a hospital room in Florence , Italy , with no memory of what has transpired over the last few days , but being plagued with visions of a scorched Earth .
Dr. Sienna Brooks , one of the doctors tending to him , reveals that he is suffering from amnesia as a result of a bullet wound to the head .
Another doctor says the police are there to question Langdon but the officer turns out to be Vayentha , an assassin , who shoots the doctor while heading down the hall .
Sienna helps Langdon to escape , and they flee to her apartment .
Among Langdon 's personal belongings , Langdon and Sienna find a Faraday pointer , a miniature image projector with a modified version of Sandro Botticelli 's Map of Hell , which itself is based on Dante 's Inferno .
They soon realize this is the first clue in a trail left by Bertrand Zobrist , a billionaire geneticist who believed that rigorous measures were necessary to reduce the Earth 's growing population , and who committed suicide after being chased by armed government agents .
Langdon and Sienna figure out that Zobrist , who is obsessed with Dante , has created a virus he has dubbed " Inferno " , with the potential of decimating half the world 's population .
In the meantime , they have been traced by both Vayentha and agents from the World Health Organization ( WHO ) , who try to raid the apartment , forcing them to flee again .
The WHO agents are headed by Elizabeth Sinskey , an old lover of Langdon 's , and are trying to prevent the release of the virus .
Vayentha reports to her employer Harry Sims , the CEO of a private security company called " The Consortium " , who is acting on behalf of Zobrist , who gives her instructions to kill Langdon as he had become a liability .
Langdon 's knowledge of Dante 's work and history , and of hidden passages in Florence , allows the two to follow clues such as letters and phrases which lead to various locations in Florence and Venice , while killing Vayentha and evading the WHO .
Along the way , Langdon discovers that he stole and hid the Dante Death Mask , a crucial clue , an event he also does not remember .
Zobrist had provided Sims with a video message about the virus , to be broadcast after it has been released .
Shocked by its content , Sims allies with Sinskey to prevent the outbreak .
However , Langdon and Sienna are contacted by Christoph Bouchard , a man purporting to be working for WHO , warning them that Sinskey has a double agenda and is after the Inferno virus for her own profit .
The three cooperate for a while , until Langdon realizes that Bouchard is lying and seeking to profit from Inferno himself , forcing the duo to flee on their own again .
Langdon figures out that the virus is in the Hagia Sophia in Istanbul .
With that knowledge , Sienna abandons Langdon , revealing that she was Zobrist 's lover and that she will ensure the release of the virus .
Zobrist and Sienna used to play treasure hunt games ; this trail was the backup plan in case something happened to Zobrist .
Langdon is recaptured by Bouchard , but Sims kills Bouchard and rescues Langdon , who then re - teams with Sinskey , who asked him for help in interpreting the imagery from the Faraday pointer .
Sims reveals he was hired by Sienna to kidnap Langdon when Zobrist had been killed , and drugged with benzodiazepine to induce a memory loss ; the events in the hospital were all staged .
They realize the virus is in a plastic bag hidden under water in the Basilica Cistern in Istanbul .
The WHO team – joined by Langdon , Sims , and Sinskey – race to locate and secure the bag , while Sienna and her allies attempt to detonate an explosive that will rupture the bag and aerosolize the virus .
Sims is killed by Sienna , and when Langdon confronts her , she commits suicide in an attempt to release the virus .
The detonation is able to rupture the bag but because it was already contained in a special containment unit , the virus was secured in time and Sienna 's allies are killed .
The virus is then taken by WHO , and Langdon goes back to Florence in order to return the Dante Death Mask .
CAST
* Tom Hanks as Dr. Robert Langdon , a professor of symbology at Harvard University .
* Felicity Jones as Dr. Sienna Brooks , a doctor who helps Langdon escape .
* Omar Sy as Christoph Bouchard , head of the SRS team ( Surveillance and Response Support ) , of the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control .
* Ben Foster as Bertrand Zobrist , a transhumanist scientist , intent on solving the world 's overpopulation problem .
* Sidse Babett Knudsen as Elizabeth Sinskey , head of the World Health Organization .
* Irrfan Khan as Harry
" The Provost " Sims , head of The Consortium , helping Zobrist in his mission .
* Ana Ularu as Vayentha , The Consortium 's agent in Florence who has orders to follow Langdon .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On July 16 , 2013 , Columbia Pictures set Ron Howard to direct Dan Brown 's fourth novel in the Robert Langdon series , Inferno , with David Koepp writing the script .
Imagine Entertainment was set to produce the film , while Tom Hanks was again set to reprise his role as Robert Langdon .
On August 26 , 2014 , Sony had finalized the deal with Howard and Hanks , and set the film for April start of production in Italy .
Brian Grazer was also set to produce the film with Howard .
On December 2 , Felicity Jones was in early talks to join the film .
On February 17 , 2015 , studio revealed the confirmed cast for the film , including Jones as Dr. Sienna Brooks , Omar Sy as Christoph Bruder , Irrfan Khan as Harry
" The Provost " Sims , and Sidse Babett Knudsen as Elizabeth Sinskey , head of the World Health Organization .
Ben Foster was set for an unspecified villainous role on March 10 , 2015 , which later revealed to be the role of Bertrand Zobrist .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Filming began on April 27 , 2015 , in Venice , Italy , and continued in Florence , Italy , starting at the end of April .
Outdoor scenes featuring Hanks were filmed near the Palazzo Vecchio and elsewhere in the historic center of the city , starting on May 2 , 2015 .
Some second unit stunts were filmed at an apartment building close to the Ponte Vecchio , in Florence .
Low - flying aerial shots of Florence landmarks , its river and bridges were filmed on May 11 , 2015 .
A sequence displayed in an early trailer features a Padova railway station sign , but locals immediately recognized the scene as recreated somewhere else .
As of June 5 , 2015 , most of the film was planned to be shot in Budapest , Hungary at Korda Studios .
Filming wrapped on July 21 , 2015 .
During location filming , its production codename was " Headache " , a reference to a concussion suffered by Langdon early in the story .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
In July 2013 , Sony set the film a release date for December 18 , 2015 .
However , due to the date clash with , the release date was moved to October 14 , 2016 .
In early 2016 , the release date was pushed back two more weeks to October 28 , 2016 .
It was released in both 2D and 3D formats .
On May 9 , 2016 , Sony Pictures released the first teaser trailer for the film .
The film premiered in Florence , Italy on October 8 , 2016 , at the New Opera Theater and also held a premiere in India on October 13 , 2016 , due to the popularity of actor Irrfan Khan .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
Inferno grossed $ 34.3 million in the United States and Canada and $ 185.7 million in other countries for a worldwide total of $ 220 million , against a production budget of $ 75 million .
In the United States and Canada , Inferno was initially expected to top the box office with around $ 25 million from 3,546 theaters in its opening weekend .
It made $ 800,000 from Thursday night previews and $ 5.6 million on its first day , lowering weekend projections to $ 15 million .
It ended up opening to $ 14.9 million , finishing second at the box office behind Boo !
A Madea Halloween and marked the fourth straight domestic disappointment for director Ron Howard .
Internationally , the film was released two weeks ahead of its North American debut , across 53 overseas markets ( about 66 % of its total international market ) in order to avoid competition from Disney / Marvel Studios ' Doctor Strange .
It finished at first place at the box office in 45 of those countries .
In total , it opened to $ 49.7 million , of which $ 2.6 million came from IMAX theaters , the second biggest amount of October .
It fell 49 % in its second weekend , earning $ 28.9 million from 58 markets and was surpassed by at the chart .
Italy , where the film was partly shot , delivered the biggest opening with $ 5 million .
This was followed by Germany ( $ 4.4 million ) , where it competed for No . 1 with the animated Finding Dory .
Russia similarly opened to $ 4.4 million , followed by the United Kingdom and Ireland ( $ 3.8 million ) , Spain ( $ 2 million ) and the Netherlands ( $ 1.2 million ) .
Infernos £ 2.97 million debut in the U.K. is considerably less than the first ( £ 9.50 million ) and the second film ( £ 6.05 million ) .
In Latin America , the film debuted in first in all 11 markets , earning a combined $ 9 million .
Brazil led with $ 4 million , followed by Mexico ( $ 2.6 million ) .
Similary in South East Asia , it saw top openings in six out of seven markets for a combined $ 6 million .
Japan ( $ 3.3 million ) , Taiwan ( $ 1.7 million ) , India ( $ 1.9 million ) and Indonesia ( $ 1 million ) posted the biggest debuts .
In China , it opened at number one with $ 13.3 million .
In the Oceania region , Australia launched with $ 1.8 million .
Inferno opened to number one across the Middle East for a regional total of $ 1.8 million .
The film opened in France on November 9 and grossed $ 24.3 million on its opening weekend .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Inferno received generally negative reviews from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes , a review aggregator , the film has an approval rating of 22 % based on 231 reviews ; the average rating is 4.5/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Senselessly frantic and altogether shallow , Inferno sends the Robert Langdon trilogy spiraling to a convoluted new low .
"
On Metacritic , the film has a score of 42 out of 100 based on 47 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B+ " on an A+ to F scale .
British film critic Mark Kermode gave the film a negative review , calling it , " intergalactically stupid " .
Cinema Blend wrote Inferno is " insufferable .
And while you 're obviously meant to take Inferno with a dash of salt , it 's so preposterously stupid and dumb that this rancid popcorn flick becomes increasingly nauseating the further you taste . "
SEE ALSO
* Biological warfare in popular culture
* List of films featuring drones
* Dante Alighieri and the Divine Comedy in popular culture REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS