WE ARE YOUR FRIENDS ( FILM )
We Are Your Friends is a 2015 drama film directed by Max Joseph ( in his directorial debut ) and written by Joseph and Meaghan Oppenheimer , from a story by Richard Silverman .
The film stars Zac Efron , Emily Ratajkowski and Wes Bentley , and follows a young Los Angeles DJ trying to make it in the music industry and figure out life with his friends .
The film was released in the United States by Warner Bros. on August 28 , 2015 .
Its financier , StudioCanal , distributed it in France , the United Kingdom , Germany , the Netherlands , Australia and New Zealand .
The film received mixed reviews and grossed $ 11 million .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Cole Carter ( Zac Efron ) , a former track star , college dropout , and struggling 23-year - old DJ in the electronic dance music ( EDM ) scene , dreams of becoming a major record producer .
He constantly reminds himself that his plan to rise to the top consists of three things : a laptop , some talent , and one track .
Cole finally books a gig to DJ at a local nightclub , where he meets the headliner , a once - innovative DJ , James Reed ( Wes Bentley ) .
James invites Cole to a party where Cole starts to hallucinate because a joint they shared contained Phencyclidine ( PCP ) .
The morning after , Cole wakes up at James ' house where he is introduced to Sophie ( Emily Ratajkowski ) , James ' girlfriend and personal assistant , who voluntarily drives him home to his shack .
Later , James calls Cole to serve as a DJ at his house party , a paid gig .
James sees potential in Cole and takes him as his student .
After listening to Cole 's original song , James criticizes Cole for imitating other well - known producers , like Skrillex , and he openly suggests to use organic sounds for an original vibe .
The two then co - create a song together using that technique , along with vocals from Sophie , which is met with success at the local nightclub .
Cole and his friends head to Las Vegas for a music festival , where he strays away from his group to meet up with Sophie , who James ditched .
Sophie then gives Cole MDMA , and they quickly fall for each other .
Back in San Fernando , James invites Cole over to watch an MMA fight with him and Sophie .
An awkward moment ends up with Sophie telling Cole to accept what happened and to leave it alone , and James gives Cole a new MacBook Pro and the opportunity to open for him at Summer Fest , a popular music festival .
One day , Cole and Paige ( Jon Bernthal ) meet up with Tanya Romero ( Alicia Coppola ) , whose house is undergoing foreclosure .
During the negotiation , Paige buys her house and rents it back to her , with the intention to sell it quickly for a substantial price , which angers Cole .
While James ' alcoholism begins to affect Sophie , he and Cole go to a strip club for his birthday .
Cole falls ill and James finds out about Cole 's relationship with Sophie , severing ties with him .
Returning to his three friends , it is revealed that Squirrel has been looking for better jobs due to his intellect and Mason has rented a house for all of them .
After intense partying with drugs and alcohol , Squirrel is found unconscious that morning , and later dies from an overdose .
After the funeral , the remaining friends begin to question their future , ending up going their separate ways when Mason blames Ollie for the drugs that Squirrel overdosed on .
Cole visits James , whose alcoholism has completely consumed him , to let him know of Squirrel 's death and that it could have possibly have been his fault , to which James consoles him and also tells him that Sophie moved to the San Fernando Valley and works at a local coffee shop , where he later visits her .
While taking a run , the battery of Cole 's phone goes dead , causing his music to stop playing .
Upon closer observation , he listens to his surroundings , which inspires him to record samples and integrate it into his long - awaited track .
Cole then calls and tells James that he has something for Summer Fest , and James gives him another chance .
The festival is set outside the American Apparel building in Los Angeles .
Cole releases his track , which contains snippets of his conversations with Sophie and Squirrel , and he later uses Squirrel 's quote " Are We Ever Going To Be Better Than This ? " as a hook before the beat drop .
When the song ends , Cole is met with enthusiastic acclaim from the audience and James .
The film concludes with Sophie going back to college , Ollie reading for an audition , Mason handling the nightclub , and Cole remaining positive about his future and creating a proper relationship with Sophie .
In the mid - credits scene , Tanya opens her front door to an Adidas box that Cole has been saving all of his earnings in throughout the film .
CAST
* Zac Efron as Cole Carter * Emily Ratajkowski as Sophie
* Shiloh Fernandez as Ollie * Alex Shaffer as Squirrel
* Jonny Weston as Dustin Mason * Wes Bentley as James Reed * Joey Rudman as Joey * Jon Bernthal as Paige Morrell * Vanessa Lengies as Mel
* Brittany Furlan as Sara
* Jon Abrahams as a club promoter
* Alicia Coppola as Tanya Romero * Korrina Rico as Crystal
* Nicky Romero as himself
* Dillon Francis as himself * Alesso as himself * DallasK as himself * Them Jeans as himself
* Zach Firtel as DJ Sweet Baby Ray 's * Andy Ward as DJ Xochil * Hayden Fein as DJ DK
* Jacob Epstein as DJ Bald Dad PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On June 6 , 2014 , Efron entered negotiations to star in an untitled film about a DJ , which was set to be directed by Max Joseph .
The film is Joseph 's debut .
On July 31 , 2014 , Ratajkowski joined the cast of the film , which by then had been given the title We Are Your Friends , and had a start date of August 18 announced for principal photography .
The name came from the 2006 Justice vs. Simian song " We Are Your Friends " .
Jon Abrahams joined the cast on August 5 , Alicia Coppola on August 14 , and Wes Bentley on August 18 .
By that point , Jonny Weston , Shiloh Fernandez , and Alex Shaffer had also signed on to star .
In late September , the film cast background actors .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography began on August 18 , 2014 , in the San Fernando Valley .
Joseph co - wrote the adapted screenplay with Meaghan Oppenheimer , based on a Richard Silverman story .
Working Title Films partners Tim Bevan and Eric Fellner co - produced the film , which was financed by StudioCanal .
Silverman was an executive producer .
StudioCanal is the worldwide distributor .
The promotional tour for the film included stops in London , Paris and 6 North American cities ( Toronto , Miami , New York , Chicago , Los Angeles and San Francisco ) .
ANIMATION Section::::Animation .
A critically noted scene in the film involves animation depicting Cole 's PCP hallucinations at a swanky LA art gallery .
Rotoscoping was used to achieve this effect .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
In November 2014 , Warner Bros. acquired the film 's North American distribution rights .
Two weeks later , StudioCanal announced that international distribution had been sold in several markets .
On April 28 , 2015 , Warner Bros. set the film for an August 28 , 2015 release .
The film was eventually released for home video on November 17 , 2015 , however , only on DVD in North America .
The Blu - ray was only released in region B ( UK , Europe , Oceania , Middle East , Africa ) on December 17 , 2015 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
We Are Your Friends grossed $ 3.6 million in North America and $ 7.5 million in other territories for a total gross of $ 11.1 million .
It made $ 1.8 million in its opening weekend , finishing 14th at the box office .
Box Office Mojo reports with a 2,333 theater count , the film grossed an average $ 758 from each venue , making it the fourth worst debut for a film with a 2,000 + theater average .
It was surpassed later in the year by Rock the Kasbah ( $ 731 average ) and Jem and the Holograms ( $ 570 ) , both of which opened on October 23 , 2015 .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
We Are Your Friends received mixed reviews from critics , although Efron 's performance and the soundtrack were praised .
Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gave the film an approval rating of 40 % based on 120 reviews , with an average rating of 5/10 .
The site 's consensus reads , " We Are Your Friends boasts magnetic stars and glimmers of insight , but they 're lost in a clichéd coming - of - age story as programmed as the soundtrack 's beats . "
On Metacritic , the film has a score of 46 out of 100 , based on 32 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
According to CinemaScore , audiences gave the film a grade of " C+ " on an A+ to F scale .
The Hollywood Reporter 's Film Critics named Efron 's one their favorite performances of 2015 , ranking him second , for his role of Cole Carter , saying , "
And while the picture 's box - office returns did n't exactly pump up the volume , this 28-year - old Tyrone Power clone increasingly ranks among the most exciting American actors of his generation . "
Bilge Ebiri of Vulture.com notes that Ratajkowski 's role takes a back seat to the love triangle 's central Efron / Bentley relationship .
The movie is also the subject of the third season of the podcast " The Worst Idea of All Time " in which two New Zealand comedians watch the same terrible movie every week for a whole year , and discuss it each week .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS