THE GOLDFINCH ( PAINTING )
The Goldfinch ( ) is a 1654 animal painting by Carel Fabritius of a chained goldfinch .
It is an oil painting on panel of 33.5 by 22.8 cm ( 13.2 by 9.0 in ) .
The work belongs to the collection of the Mauritshuis in The Hague , Netherlands .
SUBJECT Section::::Subject .
The painting is a trompe - l'œil of a European goldfinch ( Carduelis carduelis ) on top of its feeder that is attached to the wall .
The feeder consists of two half rings and a blue container .
The bird is sitting on the top ring , to which it is chained by its foot .
The painting is signed " " at the bottom .
In the 17th century , goldfinches were popular pets because they could be trained to draw water from a bowl with a miniature bucket .
The Dutch title of the painting pertains to the bird 's nickname puttertje , which refers to this custom and translates literally as ' little weller ' .
STYLE Section::::Style .
The work was painted without major corrections , with only minor ones to the contours of the bird .
Most of the painting is set up with large brush strokes , but details such as the chain are painted with more precision .
Fabritius showed off his skill by painting the bird 's head foreshortened .
It is one of three paintings that Fabritius painted in the year that he died .
It is painted in a style distinct from Fabritius ' master Rembrandt .
In style , the work is closer to Fabritius ' supposed pupil Johannes Vermeer , who further improved the skill of painting shadows .
Art historians have found no hard evidence to support this master - pupil relationship .
As a trompe - l'œil , it is a unique work in Dutch Golden Age painting .
It has been compared with Still - Life with Partridge and Gauntlets ( 1540 ) that Jacopo de ' Barbari painted more than 100 years earlier .
OWNERSHIP Section::::Ownership .
The Goldfinch was owned by Chevalier Joseph - Guillaume - Jean Camberlyn in Brussels , when it was given to Etienne - Joseph - Théophile Thoré in 1865 .
It was sold again at Hôtel Drouot in Paris on 5 December 1892 .
The painting was later purchased by Abraham Bredius for the Mauritshuis at the sale of the E. Martinet collection also at Hôtel Drouot on 27 February 1896 .
The painting is in the permanent collection of the Mauritshuis in The Hague .
CULTURAL LEGACY Section::::Cultural legacy .
The painting plays a central role in the Pulitzer Prize - winning novel The Goldfinch by Donna Tartt .
REFERENCES
SOURCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Goldfinch at the Mauritshuis website