NAVIENT CORPORATION
Navient is a U.S. corporation based in Wilmington , Delaware , whose operations include servicing and collecting on student loans .
Managing nearly $ 300 billion in student loans for more than 12 million customers , the company was formed in 2014 by the split of Sallie Mae into two distinct entities , Sallie Mae Bank and Navient .
Navient employs 6,000 individuals at offices across the U.S.
As of 2018 , Navient services 25 % of student loans in the United States .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Navient was established in 1973 as a Government - Sponsored Enterprise ( GSE ) called Student Loan Marketing Association ( nicknamed Sallie Mae ) .
The company was created by Congress to support the student loan program established by the Higher Education Act of 1965 .
In 2004 , Sallie Mae 's GSE charter dissolved and it became a private - sector company with an independent board .
The U.S. Department of Education selected Sallie Mae in 2009 to service federal loans on its behalf .
In 2010 , Congress passed the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 , which eliminated the federally guaranteed loan program known as Federal Family Education Loan Program ( FFELP ) , under which banks and companies like Sallie Mae made loans to college students backed by a federal guarantee .
As a result , effective July 1 , 2010 , all federal loans were originated directly by the U.S. Department of Education .
The company announced in 2013 its plans to separate into two publicly traded companies – an education loan management business to be launched with a new name – Navient – and a consumer banking business , which retained the name Sallie Mae .
The spin - off was completed on April 30 , 2014 .
In 2015 , Navient attracted recognition from 2020 Women on Boards , the Women 's Forum of New York , and the New York Stock Exchange Governance Services for gender diversity on its board of directors
The company acquired asset recovery and business process outsourcing firm , Gila LLC , and health care payments firm Xtend Healthcare .
CORPORATE AND FINANCIAL Section::::Corporate and financial .
Navient trades on the Nasdaq stock exchange under the ticker symbol NAVI .
Navient holds the largest portfolio of education loans insurance or guaranteed under the Federal Family Education Loan Program , as well as the largest portfolio of Private Education Loans .
In 2014 , Moody 's downgraded Navient 's senior unsecured debt and corporate family ratings to Ba3 because of its loss of the earnings , cash flows , equity and high leverage .
EXECUTIVE LEADERSHIP
Section::::Executive leadership .
Jack Remondi is the CEO of Navient and has written and spoken about recommendations to improve the student loan program .
SLABS
Section::::SLABS .
Navient funds most of its operation by manufacturing student loan asset - backed securities : bundling loans and selling them to investors as financial instruments .
The SLABS are graded by bond rating agencies such as Moody 's Investor Services and Fitch Ratings .
The value of SLABS have been reduced as more students choose income - based repayment plans .
As of June 2016 , a majority of the SLAB tranches continue to be downgraded .
LAWSUITS , INVESTIGATIONS , SETTLEMENTS , AND CONTROVERSIES Section::::Lawsuits , investigations , settlements , and controversies .
In August 2015 , the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau , which has been investigating the company for nearly two years , sent Navient a letter telling its executives that the agency 's enforcement staff had found enough evidence to indicate the company violated consumer protection laws .
On May 28 , 2015 , the United States Department of Justice announced that nearly 78,000 military service members would begin receiving $ 60 million in compensation for being charged excess interest on their student loans by Navient .
On March 14 , 2016 , Senator Elizabeth Warren gave a speech in Congress qualifying Navient 's service and subsequent contract award by the Department of Education as " an outrageous fiasco " .
Warren recommended " a total reform of student loan servicing to make sure that nothing as the Navient disaster ever happens again " .
In June 2016 , stockholders filed a class action lawsuit against Navient .
The plaintiffs included Chicago police officers and retired city employees in Providence , Rhode Island .
On July 5 , 2016 , Guy Micciche filed a complaint against Navient in U.S. District Court alleging that the debt collector contacted the plaintiff , several times , on his cellular phone using an automated dialing system .
In the complaints , the plaintiff alleged that he told Navient to stop calling him , but that the company persisted .
On January 18 , 2017 the CFPB , along with the Attorneys General of Illinois , Pennsylvania , and Washington state , filed a complaint against Navient in the United States District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania alleging violations of the Fair Credit Reporting Act and Fair Debt Collection Act .
It alleged that Navient " systematically and illegally [ failed ] borrowers at every stage of repayment " with " abusive interest charges , hurting disabled military veterans by making inaccurate reports to credit companies about them and making repayments harder than necessary . "
According to the court filing , * " Navient has failed to perform its core duties in the servicing of student loans , violating Federal consumer financial laws ... "
* " Navient systematically deterred numerous borrowers from obtaining access to some or all of the benefits and protections associated with these plans [ plans limiting repayment based on income ] .
Despite assuring borrowers that it would help them find the right repayment option for their circumstances , Navient steered these borrowers experiencing financial hardship that was not short - term or temporary into costly payment relief designed for borrowers experiencing short - term financial problems , before or instead of affordable long - term repayment options that were more beneficial to them in light of their financial situation . "
*
" For borrowers who did enroll in long - term repayment plans , Navient failed to disclose the annual deadline to renew those plans , misrepresented the consequences of non - renewal , and obscured its renewal notice to borrowers who were due for renewal .
As a result , the affordable payment amount expired for hundreds of thousands of borrowers , resulting in an immediate increase in their monthly payment and other financial harm . "
* " Navient also misreported information to consumer reporting agencies about thousands of borrowers who were totally and permanently disabled , including veterans whose total and permanent disability was connected to their military service , by making it appear as if those borrowers had defaulted on their student loans when they had not , damaging their credit ; misrepresented one of its requirements for borrowers to release their cosigner from their private student loan , thereby denying or delaying access to an important feature on many cosigned private loans that relieves a cosigner of responsibility for the loan once the borrower meets certain eligibility criteria ; and repeated the same errors in processing federal and private student loan borrowers ' payments month after month , even after borrowers complained to Navient about those errors . "
The company released a public statement and fact sheet denying the allegations and calling them politically motivated and harmful to borrowers .
Since at least since 2011 , up to 2017 , " tens of thousands " of complaints were filed against Navient .
In 2017 , 6,708 federal complaints were filed about the company , in addition to 4,185 private complaints – more than any other student loan lender .
In 2018 , it was revealed that Navient has attempted to collect loans from co - signers after a student 's accidental death .
Navient was also sued by the American Federation of Teachers ( AFT ) for allegedly failing to divert teachers into public forgiveness plans .
Former Attorney General of Louisiana , Charles C. Foti , Jr. and the law firm of Kahn Swick & Foti announced that had started investigating Navient .
The investigation is focusing on whether Navient 's officers and/or directors breached their fiduciary duties to Navient 's shareholders or otherwise violated state or federal laws .
STUDENT LOAN RESISTANCE GROUPS Section::::Student loan resistance groups .
Student Loan Justice is one group that has fought Navient by calling for bankruptcy laws to again include student loan debt .
SEE ALSO
* FAFSA
* Federal Student Aid *
FFELP
*
Sallie Mae
* U.S. Department of Education
* USA Funds
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS