JUDGE RINDER Judge Rinder is a British arbitration show , styled as a court show , that has aired on ITV since it started on 11 August 2014 .
The show depicts Robert Rinder as an arbitrator overseeing civil cases .
Rinder is styled as a Judge for the show but is not a member of the Judiciary of the United Kingdom .
Rinder is a practising criminal barrister at 2 Hare Court Chambers in London and this is made clear on the show .
Any awards handed down by Rinder are paid by the production company rather than the loser .
SHOW STRUCTURE Section::::Show structure .
The hearings are conducted in a studio styled as a courtroom with entertainment styling including flags and a gavel which are not used in UK courts .
The robes worn by Rinder are regular barristers ' robes without the wig , and in England and Wales , most small claim trials are conducted in District Judges ' Chambers .
The show shares the same format as other television court shows , such as Judge Judy and Judge Mathis .
The claimant and defendant enter the courtroom separately , while announcer Charles Foster announces their names ( unlike Judge Judy , where full names are used , they are only identified by first names ) , along with details of the case , and take their places at their respective benches : the claimant on the judge 's left , and the defendant on the judge 's right .
Rinder then asks the claimant and defendant to confirm their names , and the case proceeds .
The bailiff of the show is Michelle Hassan , who passes items of evidence ( photographs , receipts , copies of text messages etc . )
between the litigants and Judge Rinder during proceedings , which can be displayed on a large screen in the courtroom ( with certain identifying information electronically blurred )
when required .
Hassan also brings a box of tissues or a glass of water to any litigant who should become distressed during the case , as well as escorting any additional witnesses into the courtroom , who give their evidence standing in a dock on the same side of the room where she stands , and out of the courtroom again afterwards .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Judge Rinder at Biogs.com