GRACE AND FRANKIE Grace and Frankie is an American comedy web television series created by Marta Kauffman and Howard J. Morris for Netflix .
The series stars Jane Fonda and Lily Tomlin in the title roles of Grace and Frankie , two unlikely friends who are brought together after their husbands announce that they are in love with each other and plan to get married .
Sam Waterston , Martin Sheen , Brooklyn Decker , Ethan Embry , June Diane Raphael , and Baron Vaughn co - star in supporting roles .
It premiered on Netflix on May 8 , 2015 , with all 13 episodes of the first season released simultaneously .
The second , third , and fourth seasons , also consisting of 13 episodes each , have been released on May 6 , 2016 , March 24 , 2017 , and January 19 , 2018 , respectively .
Despite mixed reviews upon its debut , the series was met with a more positive critical reception towards its later seasons and has received several nominations , including five Primetime Emmy Award nominations for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series and a Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Actress – Television Series Musical or Comedy .
On February 15 , 2018 , the series was renewed for a fifth season , which is set to premiere on January 18 , 2019 .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
The series follows septuagenarians Grace , a retired cosmetics mogul , and Frankie , a hippie art teacher , whose husbands , Robert and Sol , are successful divorce lawyers in San Diego .
Grace and Frankie 's lives are turned upside down when Robert and Sol announce that they are in love with each other and are leaving their wives .
Now , the women , who have never particularly liked each other , are forced to live together and learn to unite and cope with difficulties .
CAST MAIN * Jane Fonda as Grace Hanson , a retired cosmetics mogul * Lily Tomlin as Frances " Frankie " Bergstein ( née Mengela ) , a hippie art teacher * Martin Sheen as Robert Hanson , a successful divorce lawyer and Grace 's former husband who later becomes Sol 's husband
* Sam Waterston as Sol Bergstein , a successful divorce lawyer and Frankie 's former husband who later becomes Robert 's husband * June Diane Raphael as Brianna Hanson , older daughter of Grace and Robert , head of the company founded and once run by Grace * Brooklyn Decker as Mallory Hanson , younger daughter of Grace and Robert , a wife and mother of four children * Ethan Embry as Coyote Bergstein , adopted son of Frankie and Sol , a substitute teacher and recovering addict
* Baron Vaughn as Nwabudike " Bud " Bergstein , adopted son of Frankie and Sol , and also a lawyer at Robert & Sol 's firm RECURRING
EPISODES
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
In March 2014 , Netflix finalized a deal for a 13-episode straight - to - series order for Grace and Frankie , with Jane Fonda and Lily Tomlin attached to star in the lead roles .
The series was written and created by Marta Kauffman and Howard J. Morris , who also serve as executive producers alongside Fonda , Tomlin , Paula Weinstein and Tate Taylor , and Skydance Productions ' Dana Goldberg , David Ellison and Marcy Ross .
On May 26 , 2015 , Netflix renewed the series for a second season which premiered on May 6 , 2016 .
On December 10 , 2016 , the series was renewed for a third season which premiered on March 24 , 2017 .
On April 12 , 2017 , the series was renewed for a fourth season , which premiered on January 19 , 2018 .
On February 15 , 2018 , the series was renewed for a fifth season , with RuPaul announced to guest star as a rival of Grace and Frankie .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Casting announcements began in June 2014 , with Martin Sheen cast in the role of Robert , Grace 's husband .
The following month , Sam Waterston was cast in the role of Sol , Frankie 's husband .
June Diane Raphael and Baron Vaughn were then added to the cast , with Raphael cast in the role of Brianna , Grace and Robert 's elder daughter , who rebels against Grace 's decorum .
Vaughn signed onto the role of Nwabudike , Frankie and Sol 's son .
Shortly afterwards , Ethan Embry and Brooklyn Decker were cast in the remaining roles on the series .
Embry joined in the role of Coyote , Frankie and Sol 's recovering drug addicted son , while Decker signed onto the role of Mallory , Grace and Robert 's younger daughter .
In October 2015 , it was announced Sam Elliott would appear in the second season as Grace 's love interest .
In April 2017 , it was reported that Lisa Kudrow will appear in the fourth season as Sheree , Grace 's manicurist .
In February 2018 , the same day as the fifth season was commissioned , RuPaul was confirmed to appear in the fifth season as a rival of Grace and Frankie .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Production on season one of Grace and Frankie began in Los Angeles , California , in early August 2014 , and ended in late November .
Production on season two of the series began in July 2015 , and ended in November the same year .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The first season of Grace and Frankie received mixed reviews from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes it has a rating of 50 % , based on 32 reviews , with an average rating of 6.2/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Grace and Frankie 's stellar cast adds an undeniable appeal , although its sloppy dialogue and clichéd sitcom setup will still leave most viewers wanting . "
On Metacritic the season has a score of 58 out of 100 , based on 27 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
The second season received a more positive reception from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes , it has a rating of 89 % , based on 9 reviews , with an average rating of 7.2/10 .
On Metacritic , the season has a score of 62 out of 100 , based on 6 critics , indicating " generally favourable reviews " .
Jasef Wisener of TVOvermind gave the second season a 4.5/5 , calling it " heartfelt and hilarious " and " a huge improvement over the sometimes sluggish first season . "
The third season received critical acclaim .
On Rotten Tomatoes , it has a rating of 100 % , based on 5 reviews , with an average rating of 7.5/10 .
ACCOLADES 67th
Primetime Emmy Awards Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series Lily Tomlin 20th Satellite Awards Best Actress in a Musical or Comedy Series Lily Tomlin 73rd
Golden Globe Awards
Best Actress – Television Series Musical or Comedy
Lily Tomlin rowspan="4 " Dorian Awards TV Comedy of the Year rowspan="4 " TV Performance of the Year –
Actress Jane Fonda TV Performance of the Year –
Actress Lily Tomlin LBGTQ TV Show of the Year 27th
GLAAD Media Awards Outstanding Comedy Series rowspan="7 " 19th OFTA Awards Best Comedy Series rowspan="7 " Best Actress in a Comedy Series Jane Fonda Best Actress in a Comedy Series Lily Tomlin Best Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series Sam Waterston
Best Ensemble in a Comedy Series Best Direction in a Comedy Series Best Writing in a Comedy Series rowspan="10"2016 rowspan="2"68th Primetime Emmy Awards Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series Lily Tomlin rowspan="2 " rowspan="2"23rd Screen Actors Guild Awards Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Comedy Series Jane Fonda rowspan=2 Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Comedy Series Costume Designers Guild Awards Outstanding Contemporary Television Series Allyson B. Fanger 28th GLAAD Media Awards Outstanding Comedy Series Artios Awards Outstanding Achievement in Casting - Television Pilot - Comedy Tracy Lilienfield ,
Emily Towler rowspan="3 " 20th OFTA Awards Best Actress in a Comedy Series Jane Fonda rowspan="3 " Best Actress in a Comedy Series Lily Tomlin Best Ensemble in a Comedy Series rowspan="4"2017 rowspan="4"69th Primetime Emmy Awards Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series Jane Fonda rowspan="4 " Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series Lily Tomlin
rowspan="5"2018
rowspan="3"70th
Primetime Emmy Awards Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series Lily Tomlin rowspan="3
" Outstanding Production Design for a Narrative Program ( Half - Hour or Less ) rowspan="2"24th Screen Actors Guild Awards Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Comedy Series Jane Fonda rowspan=2 Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Comedy Series rowspan="2"2019 rowspan="2"25th Screen Actors Guild Awards Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Comedy Series Jane Fonda rowspan=2 Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Comedy Series CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
After the show 's release , Tomlin and Fonda expressed displeasure once it became public that their salaries were just equal to those of Sheen and Waterston , even though " the show is not ' Sol and Robert ' , it 's ' Grace and Frankie , ' " in the words of Lily Tomlin , and contended this constituted a significant pay inequity .
Shortly thereafter , Sheen and Waterston went on the record to support their co - stars ' demands for a salary increase , with Waterston being quoted as saying : " I think they 're being cheated " .
After fans of the show gathered nearly 200,000 signatures on a petition protesting the disparity , the two actresses issued a public statement backing away from criticism , saying : " This just reminds us to be mindful of how things come across in interviews .
We appreciate everyone 's support and the attention to this issue , but the structure of Grace and Frankie is fair , and we could n't be happier to work with Skydance , Netflix and the great cast of this show . "
Fonda and Tomlin made a statement to The Wrap that they were never unhappy with the salaries to start with and that they had " made a joke in an interview about our salaries , which was taken out of context . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS