ACUTE AND OBTUSE TRIANGLES
An acute triangle is a triangle with all three angles acute ( less than 90 ° ) .
An obtuse triangle is one with one obtuse angle ( greater than 90 ° ) and two acute angles .
Since a triangle 's angles must sum to 180 ° , no triangle can have more than one obtuse angle .
Acute and obtuse triangles are the two different types of oblique triangles — triangles that are not right triangles because they have no 90 ° angle .
PROPERTIES Section::::Properties .
In all triangles , the centroid — the intersection of the medians , each of which connects a vertex with the midpoint of the opposite side — and the incenter — the center of the circle that is internally tangent to all three sides — are in the interior of the triangle .
However , while the orthocenter and the circumcenter are in an acute triangle 's interior , they are exterior to an obtuse triangle .
The orthocenter is the intersection point of the triangle 's three altitudes , each of which perpendicularly connects a side to the opposite vertex .
In the case of an acute triangle , all three of these segments lie entirely in the triangle 's interior , and so they intersect in the interior .
But for an obtuse triangle , the altitudes from the two acute angles intersect only the extensions of the opposite sides .
These altitudes fall entirely outside the triangle , resulting in their intersection with each other ( and hence with the extended altitude from the obtuse - angled vertex ) occurring in the triangle 's exterior .
Likewise , a triangle 's circumcenter — the intersection of the three sides ' perpendicular bisectors , which is the center of the circle that passes through all three vertices — falls inside an acute triangle but outside an obtuse triangle .
The right triangle is the in - between case : both its circumcenter and its orthocenter lie on its boundary .
In any triangle , any two angle measures
A and B opposite sides a and b respectively are related according to
This implies that the longest side in an obtuse triangle is the one opposite the obtuse - angled vertex .
An acute triangle has three inscribed squares , each with one side coinciding with part of a side of the triangle and with the square 's other two vertices on the remaining two sides of the triangle .
( In a right triangle two of these are merged into the same square , so there are only two distinct inscribed squares . )
However , an obtuse triangle has only one inscribed square , one of whose sides coincides with part of the longest side of the triangle .
All triangles in which the Euler line is parallel to one side are acute .
This property holds for side BC if and only if formula_3 INEQUALITIES SIDES Section::::Inequalities .
Section::::Sides .
If angle C is obtuse then for sides a , b , and c we have with the left inequality approaching equality in the limit only as the apex angle of an isosceles triangle approaches 180 ° , and with the right inequality approaching equality only as the obtuse angle approaches 90 ° .
If the triangle is acute then ALTITUDE Section::::Altitude .
If C is the greatest angle and h is the altitude from vertex C , then for an acute triangle with the opposite inequality if C is obtuse .
MEDIANS Section::::Medians .
With longest side c and medians m and m from the other sides , for an acute triangle but with the inequality reversed for an obtuse triangle .
The median m from the longest side is greater or less than the circumradius for an acute or obtuse triangle respectively : for acute triangles , with the opposite for obtuse triangles .
AREA Section::::Area .
Ono 's inequality for the area A , holds for all acute triangles but not for all obtuse triangles .
TRIGONOMETRIC FUNCTIONS Section::::Trigonometric functions .
For an acute triangle we have , for angles A , B , and C , with the reverse inequality holding for an obtuse triangle .
For an acute triangle with circumradius R , and For an acute triangle , with the reverse inequality for an obtuse triangle .
For an acute triangle , For any triangle the triple tangent identity states that the sum of the angles ' tangents equals their product .
Since an acute angle has a positive tangent value while an obtuse angle has a negative one , the expression for the product of the tangents shows that for acute triangles , while the opposite direction of inequality holds for obtuse triangles .
We have for acute triangles , and the reverse for obtuse triangles .
For all acute triangles , For all acute triangles with inradius r and circumradius R , For an acute triangle with area K , CIRCUMRADIUS , INRADIUS , AND EXRADII Section::::Circumradius , inradius , and exradii .
In an acute triangle , the sum of the circumradius R and the inradius r is less than half the sum of the shortest sides a and b : while the reverse inequality holds for an obtuse triangle .
For an acute triangle with medians m , m , and m and circumradius R , we have while the opposite inequality holds for an obtuse triangle .
Also , an acute triangle satisfies in terms of the excircle radii r , r , and r , again with the reverse inequality holding for an obtuse triangle .
For an acute triangle with semiperimeter s , and the reverse inequality holds for an obtuse triangle .
For an acute triangle with area K , DISTANCES INVOLVING TRIANGLE CENTERS Section::::Distances involving triangle centers .
For an acute triangle the distance between the circumcenter O and the orthocenter H satisfies with the opposite inequality holding for an obtuse triangle .
For an acute triangle the distance between the incircle center I and orthocenter H satisfies where r is the inradius , with the reverse inequality for an obtuse triangle .
INSCRIBED
SQUARE
Section::::Inscribed square .
If one of the inscribed squares of an acute triangle has side length x and another has side length x with x < x , then
TWO TRIANGLES Section::::Two triangles .
If two obtuse triangles have sides ( a , b , c ) and ( p , q , r ) with c and r being the respective longest sides , then EXAMPLES
TRIANGLES WITH SPECIAL NAMES Section::::Examples .
Section::::Triangles with special names .
The Calabi triangle , which is the only non - equilateral triangle for which the largest square that fits in the interior can be positioned in any of three different ways , is obtuse and isosceles with base angles 39.1320261 ...
° and third angle 101.7359477 ...
° .
The equilateral triangle , with three 60 ° angles , is acute .
The Morley triangle , formed from any triangle by the intersections of its adjacent angle trisectors , is equilateral and hence acute .
The golden triangle is the isosceles triangle in which the ratio of the duplicated side to the base side equals the golden ratio .
It is acute , with angles 36 ° , 72 ° , and 72 ° , making it the only triangle with angles in the proportions
1:2:2 .
The heptagonal triangle , with sides coinciding with a side , the shorter diagonal , and the longer diagonal of a regular heptagon , is obtuse , with angles formula_29 and formula_30 TRIANGLES WITH INTEGER SIDES Section::::Triangles with integer sides .
The only triangle with consecutive integers for an altitude and the sides is acute , having sides ( 13,14,15 ) and altitude from side 14 equal to 12 .
The smallest - perimeter triangle with integer sides in arithmetic progression , and the smallest - perimeter integer - sided triangle with distinct sides , is obtuse : namely the one with sides ( 2 , 3 , 4 ) .
The only triangles with one angle being twice another and having integer sides in arithmetic progression are acute : namely , the ( 4,5,6 ) triangle and its multiples .
There are no acute integer - sided triangles with area = perimeter , but there are three obtuse ones , having sides ( 6,25,29 ) , ( 7,15,20 ) , and ( 9,10,17 ) .
The smallest integer - sided triangle with three rational medians is acute , with sides ( 68 , 85 , 87 ) .
Heron triangles have integer sides and integer area .
The oblique Heron triangle with the smallest perimeter is acute , with sides ( 6 , 5 , 5 ) .
The two oblique Heron triangles that share the smallest area are the acute one with sides ( 6 , 5 , 5 ) and the obtuse one with sides ( 8 , 5 , 5 ) , the area of each being 12 .
REFERENCES