MAGNUS CHASE AND THE GODS OF ASGARD Magnus Chase and the Gods of Asgard is a trilogy of fantasy novels written by American author Rick Riordan and published by Disney - Hyperion .
It is based on Norse mythology and is set in the same universe as the Camp Half - Blood Chronicles and The Kane Chronicles series .
The first book , The Sword of Summer , was released on October 6 , 2015 .
The second book , The Hammer of Thor , was released on October 4 , 2016 .
The Ship of the Dead , the third and final book , was released on October 3 , 2017 .
The main protagonist , Magnus Chase , son of the Vanir god of fertility Frey , narrates the novel in first person .
He is a cousin of Annabeth Chase , a main character of the Percy Jackson and the Olympians and The Heroes of Olympus series , who links the two series together .
BOOKS
THE SWORD OF SUMMER Section::::Books .
Section::::The Sword of Summer .
The Sword of Summer is the first book in the series , released on October 6 , 2015 as a hardcover , ebook , and audiobook .
The novel is narrated by Magnus Chase , a homeless Bostonian orphan , who learns he is the son of a Norse god .
On the same day , he is confronted by a fire giant named Surt , who wishes to claim a sword called " Sumarbrander " ( the " Sword of Summer " , or " Jack " ) .
In the fight , Magnus is killed and carried to a modernized interpretation of the Norse afterlife by a valkyrie named Samirah al - Abbas ( Sam ) .
With the help of Sam , a dwarf named Blitz , and an elf named Hearth ; Magnus foils the giant 's plans to free the Fenris Wolf and hasten the end of the world .
The novel has been well - received since its publication , but was not a " big front - runner " among other bestselling books in 2015 .
It debuted at # 1 on the New York Times Children 's Middle Grade Hardcover Best Sellers list , and rose to # 3 on Amazon 's best - selling Children 's Books list for 2015 .
It also won the Goodreads Choice Award for Middle Grade & Children 's books in 2015 .
The Sword of Summer has been especially praised as an excellent continuation of author Rick Riordan 's writing style , although some critics have expressed regret that the book only meets the expectations of fans , rather than surpassing them .
The Sword of Summer was later published in several foreign - language editions , as well as UK edition with the same title ( published by Puffin Books ) .
Its foreign - language editions include ones in Spanish , Portuguese , Italian , Turkish , Dutch , German , Bulgarian , Finnish , Polish , French , Norwegian , Chinese , Czech , Russian , Romanian , Indonesian and Hebrew .
While the U.S. editions have cover art by illustrator John Rocco , most foreign editions have unique art created by other artists and illustrators .
In the U.S. , several unique promotional editions were released by different booksellers during the initial publication ; the mass - merchandiser Target , for example , released its books with an included poster of the Nine Worlds of Norse mythology .
THE HAMMER OF THOR Section::::The Hammer of Thor .
The Hammer of Thor is the second book in the Magnus Chase and the Gods of Asgard series and was released on October 4 , 2016 .
In this book , Magnus receives a warning from Otis , Thor 's goat and discovers that the hammer of Thor , Mjölnir , is missing .
He embarks on a quest with Samirah , Hearthstone , Blitzen , and Alex Fierro , a genderfluid child of Loki to retrieve it .
However , Loki reveals that the giant Thrym has the hammer , and forces the group to retrieve the Skofnung Sword , the only sword which can free him .
He arranges a marriage between Samirah and the giant so as to obtain the hammer and the sword as wedding presents .
At the wedding , Alex takes Samirah 's place and tries to prevent Magnus 's Uncle Randolph from freeing Loki .
However , they fail to do so , and Loki is freed .
The group is honored for recovering Mjolnir , but are given another mission to recapture Loki and to stop him from bringing about Ragnarok .
The novel was awarded the 2017 Stonewall Book Award for children 's literature .
THE SHIP OF THE DEAD Section::::The Ship of the Dead .
The Ship of the Dead is the third and final book in the Magnus Chase and the Gods of Asgard series and was released on October 3 , 2017 .
Magnus and his crew must sail to the farthest borders of Jotunheim and Niflheim in pursuit of Asgard 's greatest threat and prevent Loki from starting Ragnarok by beating him in a flyting with Kvasir 's Mead and capturing him in a magical nutshell , thus stopping Naglfar from sailing .
They are greeted by the gods when they arrive in Vigridr , after sailing the currents Naglfar , the ship of the dead would have sailed .
SUPPLEMENTARY WORKS HOTEL VALHALLA : GUIDE TO THE NORSE WORLDS
Section::::Supplementary works .
Section::::Hotel Valhalla : Guide to the Norse Worlds .
Hotel Valhalla :
Guide to the Norse Worlds is a supplementary work for the Magnus Chase and the Gods of Asgard series .
It was published as a hardcover on August 16 , 2016 .
9
FROM THE NINE WORLDS
Section::::9
From the Nine Worlds .
" 9 From the Nine Worlds " is the second supplementary work for the series , consisting of nine short stories , each told by a different character .
It was published on October 2 , 2018 .
CHARACTERS
* Magnus Chase - The protagonist of the series , a 16-year - old demigod son of the god Frey as well as the cousin of Greek demigod Annabeth Chase .
By the third book , The Ship of the Dead , * Samirah ( Sam ) al - Abbas - An Arab American Valkyrie and demigod daughter of the god Loki .
* Blitzen ( Blitz ) -
A svartalf , son of Freya , and expert on clothing .
He is the best friend of Hearthstone .
* Hearthstone ( Hearth ) -
A deaf - mute light elf from Alfheim , and experienced in rune casting .
He uses ASL and has two sets of runestones ; wooden and stone .
*
Alex Fierro - A genderfluid demigod child of Loki who wields a garrote capable of slicing even the most hardened rock .
They are first introduced in the second book , The Hammer of Thor .
By the third book , The Ship of the Dead , * Randolph Chase - Magnus 's uncle , obsessed with Norse mythology .
* Loki - Norse god of mischief , lies , and deceit .
He is the father of demigod Samirah Al - Abbas and mother of demigod Alex Fierro .
* Annabeth Chase - Magnus Chase 's cousin .
Also in the Percy Jackson and the Olympians and The Heroes of Olympus series .
Demigod daughter of the Greek goddess Athena .
*
Mallory Keen - A resident at Hotel Valhalla .
She is the daughter of Frigg .
She is the girlfriend / ex - girlfriend / re - girlfriend / ex - girlfriend / re - girlfriend/ of Halfborn Gunderson and has dual serrated knives , a gift from her mother , Frigg .
*
Halfborn Gunderson - A resident at Hotel Valhalla .
He was a Viking until he died .
He has two axes , and is very violent .
* Thomas Jefferson , Jr " T.J. " - Is a resident at Hotel Valhalla .
He is the son of Tyr .
His mother was a runaway slave .
He was a Union soldier in the Civil War .
He has a rifle and a bone steel bayonet , given to him by his father .
* " X " / Odin - Odin is the king of gods .
He pretended to be a half - troll named " X " , but in reality he was trying to watch Hotel Valhalla .
* Percy Jackson -
He is the main protagonist in Percy Jackson and the Olympians and a main character in The Heroes of Olympus .
In this series , he appears briefly to teach Magnus ocean survival skills to take down Loki and survive the sea Gods .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Publishers Weekly review of The Sword of Summer stated that , " ten years after The Lightning Thief ...
[Magnus Chase and the Gods of Asgard 's ] sensibility is right in line with the Percy Jackson novels , and the audience will be just as large . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Magnus Chase and the Gods of Asgard at The Worlds of Rick Riordan ( Disney : readriordan.com )
* Magnus Chase at RickRiordan.com