PRIDE AND PREJUDICE AND ZOMBIES ( FILM ) Pride and Prejudice and Zombies ( stylised as Pride + Prejudice + Zombies ) is a 2016 British - American historical action comedy horror film based on Seth Grahame - Smith 's 2009 novel , Pride and Prejudice and Zombies , which parodies the 1813 novel Pride and Prejudice by Jane Austen .
The film is directed by Burr Steers , who wrote the adapted screenplay , and stars Lily James , Sam Riley , Jack Huston , Bella Heathcote , Douglas Booth , Matt Smith , Charles Dance , and Lena Headey .
The film follows the general plot of Austen 's original novel , with elements of zombie , horror and post - apocalyptic fiction incorporated .
Development of a film adaptation based on Grahame - Smith 's novel began in 2009 , with Natalie Portman attached to star and produce and Lionsgate to distribute .
However , the film went through development hell , with budgetary disputes halting pre - production .
Principal photography took place in South East England from September 24 , 2014 until November 21 .
Pride and Prejudice and Zombies premiered in Los Angeles on January 23 , 2016 and was theatrically released by Screen Gems on February 5 , 2016 in the United States , and by Lionsgate on February 11 in the United Kingdom .
The film received generally mixed reviews from critics , with criticism for the tone , action and plot , but praise for the production values , acting and humor .
It was a commercial failure , grossing just $ 16 million worldwide against a budget of $ 28 million .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Early 19th century England is beseiged by zombies ; the Bennet sisters — Elizabeth , Jane , Kitty , Lydia , and Mary — have all been trained in the art of weaponry and martial arts in China at their father 's behest so they can defend themselves from the zombies .
Mrs. Bennet only wants to see her daughters married off to wealthy suitors .
The Bennets attend a country dance also attended by Colonel Darcy and Caroline and Charles Bingley .
There , the young and handsome Bingley falls for Jane .
Charles Bingley has inherited £ 100,000 ( £ million today)—attracting Mrs. Bennet 's attention as a desirable suitor for her daughter .
When zombies attack the ball , the Bennet sisters fight them off , and Colonel Darcy , a friend of Bingley 's and skilled zombie - killer , who was conversely trained in Japanese martial arts – with property that pays him £ 10,000 annually ( £ today ) – becomes smitten with Elizabeth .
On the way to the Bingleys ' later , Jane is attacked by a zombie and catches a fever .
Darcy orders her confined in fear that she may have been bitten but she recovers .
The Bennets are visited by the overbearing Parson Collins , who proposes to Elizabeth but states that she must give up her life as a warrior , something she refuses to do .
Elizabeth meets a charming soldier named Wickham and arranges to meet him at another ball .
She travels with him to a church that is filled with zombies who feed on pig brains instead of human brains , keeping their behaviour relatively normal .
Wickham believes that with these new civilised zombies , humans can co - exist with them .
He asks Elizabeth to elope but she backs off .
Elizabeth learns that Darcy convinced the Bingleys to leave to keep Bingley away from Jane .
When Darcy proposes to Elizabeth , having fallen in love with her , she expresses outrage at his actions and fights him .
Darcy later writes Elizabeth a letter to apologize .
He reiterates that he separated Jane and Bingley for fear that Jane only wanted to marry Bingley for his wealth – having overheard Mrs. Bennet drunkenly mention it .
He also exposes Wickham 's true nature , he and Wickham were childhood friends but Wickham may have murdered Darcy 's father , squandered his inheritance , then tried to elicit additional money from Darcy 's estate ; when that failed , Wickham tried to elope with Darcy 's little sister , for her fortune .
Elizabeth learns that Wickham has taken Lydia and London has been overrun with zombies .
Darcy saves Lydia and learns that Wickham is using the ' civilised ' zombies to create a zombie army , which has overrun London based on Wickham 's planning and will rule the country .
He stops him by giving the zombies human brains , which turns them savage .
While fighting , Darcy stabs Wickham 's chest , revealing him to have been undead all along , staying civilized by consuming pig brains .
Elizabeth saves Darcy from being killed by Wickham .
As the two ride across the bridge , the army destroys it to keep the zombies from crossing over from London .
Darcy is injured in the explosion and Elizabeth tearfully admits her love for him .
After Darcy recovers , he proposes to Elizabeth again and this time , she agrees .
The two have a joint wedding with Bingley and Jane .
In a mid - credits scene , Wickham leads a horde of zombies toward the wedding celebration with the Four Horsemen of the Zombie Apocalypse riding behind him .
CAST * Lily James as Elizabeth Bennet * Sam Riley as Fitzwilliam Darcy
* Jack Huston as Mr. Wickham * Bella Heathcote as Jane Bennet * Douglas Booth as Mr. Bingley
* Matt Smith as Parson Collins * Charles Dance as Mr. Bennet * Lena Headey as Lady Catherine
de Bourgh
* Suki Waterhouse as Kitty Bennet * Emma Greenwell as Caroline Bingley
* Ellie Bamber as Lydia Bennet * Millie Brady as Mary Bennet * Sally Phillips as Mrs. Bennet * Aisling Loftus as Charlotte Lucas
* Dolly Wells as Mrs. Featherstone
* Tom Lorcan as Lieutenant Denny * Hermione Corfield as Cassandra * Jess Radomska as Annabelle Netherfield PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
The film is based on the 2009 novel of the same name , which was billed as having been co - written by Jane Austen and Seth Grahame - Smith .
The project was first announced on December 10 , 2009 , in Variety , when it was revealed that Natalie Portman would both star in the role of Elizabeth Bennet and produce , and that Lionsgate would finance and distribute .
On December 14 , David O. Russell was announced as the writer and director of the film .
On October 5 , 2010 , it was revealed that Russell had left the production due to scheduling conflicts .
Russell later revealed that he had disputes with Lionsgate over the budget .
The next day , it was announced that Portman had quit the role of Elizabeth Bennet , though she would still produce the film .
Following Russell 's departure , Lionsgate offered Mike Newell and Matt Reeves the chance to take over from him , but both declined .
On November 3 , 2010 , the Los Angeles Times reported that Lionsgate had held meetings with Mike White , Neil Marshall and Jeffrey Blitz as potential directors .
White was hired on November 5 .
On January 19 , 2011 , it was announced that White had had to leave the film due to scheduling conflicts with a pre - existing commitment at HBO .
In February 2011 , Craig Gillespie took over as director .
Gillespie revealed he was attracted to the project by the mashing of genres .
In May 2011 , screenwriter Marti Noxon was hired to rewrite Russell 's script .
On October 27 , 2011 , it was announced that Gillespie had left the film .
The project then stalled until March 2013 , when Panorama Media joined to produce , finance , and handle foreign sales .
In May , it was announced that Burr Steers would take over as director .
Steers did a rewrite of the script , saying that he had reinserted " all the Pride and Prejudice beats " .
On September 23 , 2014 , Screen Gems picked up distribution rights in the United States , with Sierra / Affinity handling international distribution .
At one point , Lily Collins , Jennifer Aniston , and Rowan Atkinson were all attached to the project .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography began on September 24 , 2014 at West Wycombe House & Park , Buckinghamshire .
During the Halloween weekend , actors were spotted shooting some scenes at Hatfield House in Hertfordshire .
In early November , crews were filming at Basing House in Old Basing .
On November 13 , filming shifted to Frensham in Surrey , where they shot until November 21 .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The film 's soundtrack was released digitally on February 5 , 2016 , and physically on February 12 by Varèse Sarabande .
The soundtrack features the film 's original score , composed and conducted by Fernando Velázquez .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
On March 30 , 2015 , Screen Gems originally set the film a release date for February 19 , 2016 .
However , on April 22 , 2015 , Screen Gems moved up the film 's release date to February 5 , 2016 .
The film was released by Lionsgate in the UK on February 11 , 2016 .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
In October 2014 , Entertainment Weekly published the first photo from the production .
In July 2015 , Lily James , Sam Riley , Bella Heathcote , Douglas Booth , Jack Huston , Matt Smith , Burr Steers and Seth Grahame - Smith appeared at a panel at Comic - Con to promote the film , where the first trailer debuted .
On October 9 , 2015 , the UK teaser trailer and poster were released .
On October 22 , 2015 , Screen Gems released the first official US trailer and poster .
On November 26 , 2015 , Lionsgate UK released a full - length trailer and the film 's first official British poster .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Pride and Prejudice and Zombies was released on DVD , Blu - ray , and 4 K Ultra HD Blu - ray on May 31 , 2016 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Pride and Prejudice and Zombies grossed $ 10.9 million in North America and $ 5.5 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 16.4 million , against a budget of $ 28 million .
The film was released in North America on February 5 , 2016 , alongside Hail , Caesar !
and The Choice .
The film was projected to gross $ 10–12 million from 2,931 theaters in its opening weekend .
It earned $ 300,000 from previews showing on Thursday night and $ 5.3 million in its opening weekend , finishing below expectations and 6th at the box office .
In its third weekend it was pulled from 2,455 theaters ( 88 % ) , the third biggest drop in history at the time .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
The film received generally mixed reviews from critics , with criticism for the " inconsistent " tone , mediocre action sequences and unsatisfying plot , though many praised the production values , performances and humor .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a rating of 43 % , based on 170 reviews , with an average rating of 5.4/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads : "
Pride and Prejudice and Zombies manages to wring a few fun moments out of its premise , but never delivers the thoroughly kooky mashup its title suggests .
" On Metacritic , the film has a score of 45 out of 100 , based on reviews from 34 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B− " on an A+ to F scale .
Rafer Guzmán of Newsday wrote positively about the film , giving the film three out of four stars , calling it " an unexpected and off - kilter treat , thanks to a BBC - quality cast and ( un)deadpan humor . "
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film 2 out of 4 stars , commenting that " PP&Z is rated PG-13 , so the zombie gore is decidedly decorous .
But before repetition dulls the party , the movie gets in a few juicy innings . "
Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle gave the film two out of four stars saying " Compared with other Jane Austen movies , it is n't much , but compared with other zombie apocalypse movies , it 's an intelligent , literate effort . "
Jesse Hassenger of The A.V. Club gave the film a C , commenting " That this particular retelling of the Jane Austen novel feels like a Cliffs Notes version is understandable ; that its zombie bits are equally rudimentary , though , is more disappointing . "
Clark Collis of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a B , saying " If more inventive than scary , Pride and Prejudice and Zombies breathes fresh life into the hugely popular , but now desperately predictable , undead genre . "
Mark Kermode of The Guardian gave the film two out of five stars , saying " Yet torn between Austen and the undead , Steers seems unsure how straight to play either element , blunting comedy , horror and romance alike .
The result lacks bite — the one element that zombies and Austen should have in common .
"
Helen O'Hara of The Daily Telegraph also gave two out of five stars , saying " If it had been more elegant in its storytelling , it could have been a fun genre crossover , but the best efforts of Steers and his cast ca n't turn the overstuffed book into a film that makes any real sense . "
Manohla Dargis of The New York Times gave the film a mixed review , saying " Both pride and prejudice still play their parts , but now in service to one tediously repeated joke : the sight of a gentleman or a lady , together or alone , playing cards or ballroom dancing , fatally swarmed by devouring zombies . "
Christy Lemire of RogerEbert.com gave the film one and a half out of four stars , saying " Like the novel Pride and Prejudice and Zombies , the movie Pride and Prejudice and Zombies is predicated on a simple , single gimmick : It 's Pride and Prejudice … with zombies .
This is a vaguely amusing idea which somehow got stretched out to an entire book , which somehow became a best seller , which inevitably means it had to be made into a film . "
Keith Uhlich of The Hollywood Reporter gave the film a negative review , calling the film " Lumbering , lifeless and — strange thing to say about a cadaver — almost entirely charmless . "
Lindsey Bahr of the Associated Press also gave a negative review , saying " This story might have been better suited to a television adaptation .
The characters would have been allowed to breathe for a beat in that case .
Here , the action and violence take up the space that would have generally been used for character development . "
Stephen Whitty of New York Daily News gave the film two out of 5 stars , saying " The hungry monsters in Pride and Prejudice and Zombies are looking for nice big brains .
Well , they wo n't find any here . "
Stephanie Merry of The Washington Post gave the film one and a half stars out of four , commenting " " Pride and Prejudice and Zombies " delivers what its title promises : a little romance and some undead villains , plus a bit of comedy .
But this overly busy riff on Austen 's winning formula does n't justify all the tinkering . "
Britton Peele of The Dallas Morning News gave the film a B− , calling the film " Fun , funny , gory and yet still strangely romantic . "
Literary scholar and Austen professor Devoney Looser stated in Entertainment Weekly magazine her opinion that the film 's first half , and especially Matt Smith 's Mr. Collins , were comic , jarring , and enjoyable .
She assessed the film overall with , " I laughed a lot
and I shrieked .
I was wavering between B+ and A−.
I 'm willing to bump it up for its originality and live with my grade - inflation reputation :
A−. " Entertainment Weekly reporter and horror fan Clark Collis did not rate the film quite as high : " I enjoy genre movies that attempt something different — and this does — but I did n't find it all that scary .
I 'd give it a ' B ' " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS