THE DUEL ( 2016 FILM )
The Duel is a 2016 American western film directed by Kieran Darcy - Smith and written by Matt Cook .
The film stars Liam Hemsworth , Emory Cohen , Woody Harrelson and Alice Braga .
The film was released for limited release and video on demand on June 24 , 2016 , by Lionsgate Premiere .
It was released on DVD and Blu - Ray on August 23 , 2016 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
On the Texas border , in 1887 , Texas Ranger David Kingston is sent by Governor " Sul " Ross to the isolated town of Mount Hermon .
David is to investigate a series of murders and disappearances of Mexican citizens , in particular to search for Maria Calderon , the missing niece of a Mexican general who is threatening to invade to find her .
In the town , preacher and mayor Abraham Brant – the man who killed David 's father in a " Helena Duel " knife fight in 1866 – is keeping all the townsfolk in some kind of fearful grip .
When David arrives in town , the townsfolk act cold and hostile towards him , with the exception of Abraham , who is smitten by David 's wife , Marisol .
David hides his identity and purpose from Abraham , instead giving the disguise of a wandering traveler .
Abraham offers David the role of becoming the town sheriff , which David hesitantly accepts , hoping the position will cover him long enough to carry out his real investigation .
While David explores the town and investigates the nearby Rio Grande for bodies , Abraham manipulates a weak - spirited Marisol into becoming dependent on him .
Marisol becomes Abraham 's willing consort , betraying all of David 's secrets .
David eventually learns Abraham 's secret - that he is abducting Mexicans to serve as prey for rich foreigners to hunt .
Abraham arranges a " Helena Duel " knife fight between his son Isaac and David , with David badly wounded before he kills Isaac .
David escapes , then frees a number of captured Mexicans from the remote prison compound , including Maria Calderon .
Suffering from his knife wounds , David manages to shoot Abraham while near the isolated compound , then pins Abraham 's leg under a boulder .
When David passes out , Abraham cuts his own leg off and crawls to David .
As he is about to cut David 's throat , Maria reappears and shoots Abraham dead .
David dumps Abraham 's body in the Rio Grande near the dead scalped Mexican woman .
The Mexican general is grateful to David for getting Maria back .
David is last seen riding off into the brush alone , staring up at the tree where Naomi was hanged from earlier .
Maybe he 's searching the area for clues of his wife Marisol .
CAST
* Woody Harrelson as Abraham
* Liam Hemsworth as David Kingston
* Alice Braga as Marisol * Emory Cohen as Isaac * Felicity Price as Naomi ( the prostitute at Hoot 's )
* William Sadler as Governor Ross
* Benedict Samuel as George ( the Brit ) * Giles Matthey as John *
Raphael Sbarge as Dr. Morris * Jason Carter as William
* David Born as Hoot ( the barkeep ) * Kimberly Hidalgo as Maria * José Zúñiga as General Calderon PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On September 28 , 2012 , Kieran Darcy - Smith was set to direct the Helena , Texas set western film ( only briefly " appears " in the final film , set instead in the fictional Mount Hermon ) based on Matt Cook 's 2009 Black Listed script , which David Hoberman and Todd Lieberman were announced to produce for their Mandeville Films .
During 2014 , a number of actors were attached to the film .
On July 1 , it was announced that Liam Hemsworth and Woody Harrelson would be starring in the lead roles of David Kingston and Abraham Brant , with the film then titled By Way of Helena .
On August 29 , Felicity Price was added to the cast .
On September 5 , William Hurt and Alice Braga joined the cast , and WestEnd Films was attached as handling international sales .
( While Hurt was still reported as being in the film as late as an April 2016 article when the trailer was released online , and a June 2016 review showing him as playing Governor Ross , he does not actually appear – nor is he credited – in the final release . )
Adam Rosenfelt and Maureen Meulen would finance the film and co - produce through their Atomic Entertainment .
On October 2 , Emory Cohen was added to the film to play Isaac .
On October 9 , Benedict Samuel joined the film to play Brit ( renamed George in the final film , a British character ) who visits the town with his father and brother to participate in the preacher 's notorious manhunts .
Nicholas Hoult , Joel Edgerton and Jamie Bell were once attached to star in the film in 2013 .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
The filming began on September 15 , 2014 , in Greenwood , Mississippi .
The shooting mostly took place at the former Florewood State Park , which was transformed into an Old West frontier town .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , The Duel has an approval rating of 19 % , based on 16 reviews , with a weighted average score of 4.8/10 .
On Metacritic , the film has a score of 42 out of 100 , based on 9 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS