JUSTICE LEAGUE ( FILM )
Justice League is a 2017 American superhero film based on the DC Comics superhero team of the same name , distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures .
It is the follow - up to 2016 's and the fifth installment in the DC Extended Universe ( DCEU ) .
The film is directed by Zack Snyder , written by Chris Terrio and Joss Whedon , and features an ensemble cast that includes Ben Affleck , Henry Cavill , Gal Gadot , Ezra Miller , Jason Momoa , and Ray Fisher as the title team , with Amy Adams , Jeremy Irons , Diane Lane , Connie Nielsen , and J. K. Simmons in supporting roles .
In the film , Batman and Wonder Woman recruit The Flash , Aquaman , and Cyborg after Superman 's death to save the world from the catastrophic threat of Steppenwolf and his army of Parademons .
The film was announced in October 2014 , with Snyder on board to direct and Terrio attached to write the script .
Initially titled Justice League Part One , with a second part to follow in 2019 , the second film was indefinitely delayed to accommodate a standalone Batman film with Affleck .
Principal photography commenced in April 2016 and ended in October 2016 .
After Snyder stepped down to deal with the death of his daughter , Joss Whedon was hired to oversee the remainder of post - production , including directing additional scenes written by himself ; Snyder retained sole directorial credit , while Whedon received a screenwriting credit .
Justice League premiered in Beijing on October 26 , 2017 , and was released in the United States in 2D , Real D 3D , and IMAX on November 17 , 2017 .
With an estimated production budget of $ 300 million , Justice League is one of the most expensive films ever made .
The film grossed $ 657 million worldwide against a break - even point of $ 750 million , becoming a box office bomb and losing the studio approximately $ 60 million , while also making it the lowest overall gross of the DCEU .
The film received mixed reviews from critics ; although the action sequences and performances ( particularly Gadot and Miller ) were praised , the plot , writing , pacing , villain , and overuse of CGI were criticized .
The film 's tone was met with a polarized reception , with some appreciating the lighter tone compared to the previous DCEU films , and others finding it inconsistent .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Thousands of years ago , Steppenwolf and his legions of Parademons attempted to take over Earth with the combined energies of three Mother Boxes .
They were foiled by a unified army that includes the Olympian Gods , Amazons , Atlanteans , mankind , and a Green Lantern .
After repelling Steppenwolf 's army , the Mother Boxes were separated and hidden in locations on the planet .
In the present , mankind is in mourning over Superman , whose death triggers the Mother Boxes to reactivate and Steppenwolf 's return to Earth .
In an effort to regain favor with his master , Darkseid , Steppenwolf aims to gather the boxes to form " The Unity " , which will destroy Earth 's ecology and terraform it in the image of Steppenwolf 's homeworld .
Steppenwolf retrieves the Mother Box from Themyscira , prompting Queen Hippolyta to warn her daughter Diana of Steppenwolf 's return .
Diana joins Bruce Wayne in his attempt to unite other metahumans to their cause , with Wayne going after Arthur Curry and Barry Allen , while Diana tries to locate Victor Stone .
Wayne fails to persuade Curry , but manages to recruit an enthusiastic Allen onto the team .
Although Diana fails to convince Stone to join , he agrees to help them locate the threat if he discovers their location .
Stone later joins the team after his father Silas and several other S.T.A.R. Labs employees are kidnapped by Steppenwolf seeking to acquire the Mother Box from mankind .
Steppenwolf attacks Atlantis to retrieve the next Mother Box , forcing Curry into action .
The team receives intel from Commissioner James Gordon leading them to Steppenwolf 's army , based in an abandoned facility under Gotham Harbor .
Although the group manages to rescue the kidnapped employees , the facility is flooded during combat , which traps the team until Curry helps delay the flood so they can escape .
Stone retrieves the last Mother Box , which he had hidden , for the group to analyze .
Stone reveals that his father used the Mother Box to rebuild Stone 's body after an accident almost cost him his life .
Wayne decides to use the Mother Box to resurrect Superman , not only to help them fight off Steppenwolf 's invasion , but also to restore hope to mankind .
Diana and Curry are hesitant about the idea , but Wayne forms a secret contingency plan in case
Superman returns as hostile .
Clark Kent 's body is exhumed and placed in the amniotic fluid of the genesis chamber of the Kryptonian ship alongside the Mother Box , which in turn activates and successfully resurrects Superman .
However , Superman 's memories have not returned , and he attacks the group after Stone accidentally launches a projectile at him .
On the verge of being killed by Superman , Batman enacts his contingency plan : Lois Lane .
Superman calms down and leaves with Lane to his family home in Smallville , where he reflects and his memories slowly come back .
In the turmoil , the last Mother Box is left unguarded and Steppenwolf retrieves it with ease .
Without Superman to aid them , the five heroes travel to a village in Russia where Steppenwolf aims to unite the Mother Boxes once again to remake Earth .
The team fights their way through the Parademons to reach Steppenwolf , although they are unable to distract him enough for Stone to separate the Mother Boxes .
Superman arrives and assists Allen in evacuating the city , as well as Stone in separating the Mother Boxes .
The team defeats Steppenwolf , who , overcome with fear , is attacked by his own Parademons before they all teleport away .
After the battle , Bruce and Diana agree to set up a base of operations for the team , with room for more members .
Diana steps back into the public spotlight as a hero ; Barry acquires a job in Central City 's police department , impressing his father ; Victor continues to explore and enhance his abilities with his father in S.T.A.R. Labs ; Arthur embraces his Atlantean heritage ; and Superman resumes his life as reporter Clark Kent .
In a post - credits scene , Lex Luthor has escaped from Arkham Asylum and then recruits Slade Wilson to form their own league .
CAST MAIN CAST
* Ben Affleck as Bruce Wayne / Batman :
* Henry Cavill as Kal - El / Clark Kent / Superman :
* Gal Gadot as Diana Prince / Wonder Woman : * Ezra Miller as Barry Allen /
The Flash :
* Jason Momoa as Arthur Curry / Aquaman :
* Ray Fisher as Victor Stone / Cyborg :
* Amy Adams as Lois Lane :
* Jeremy Irons as Alfred Pennyworth : Wayne 's butler , chief of security , and trusted confidant .
* Diane Lane as Martha Kent :
Kent 's adoptive mother .
* Connie Nielsen as Hippolyta : Diana 's mother and Queen of the Amazons .
* J. K. Simmons as James Gordon :
The Commissioner of the Gotham City Police Department , and close ally of Batman .
* Ciarán Hinds as Steppenwolf : ADDITIONAL CAST Section::::Cast .
Section::::Additional cast .
The Olympian Old Gods
Zeus , Ares and Artemis are portrayed by fitness model Sergi Constance , stuntman Nick McKinless , and MMA fighter
Aurore Lauzeral , respectively .
All three were required to reach a specific degree of physicality , with Snyder instructing McKinless to sport " veins like worms and paper thin skin " .
In the finished film , McKinless ' face was replaced with David Thewlis ' face , and Thewlis received the credit as Ares .
Robin Wright reprises her role as Antiope during a flashback sequence .
Amber Heard portrays the Atlantean Mera .
Two ancient kings of Earth appear during a scene depicting Steppenwolf 's first invasion , including King Atlan of Atlantis and Arthur Pendragon of ancient England ; portrayed by Julian Lewis Jones and Francis Magee , respectively .
Joe Morton reprises his role as Silas Stone , Victor Stone 's father and S.T.A.R. Labs ' head while Billy Crudup appears , uncredited , as Henry Allen , Barry Allen 's father .
Joe Manganiello and Jesse Eisenberg appear uncredited in a post - credits scene as Slade Wilson / Deathstroke and Lex Luthor , respectively .
Michael McElhatton appears as the leader of a group of terrorists who clash with Wonder Woman early in the film , while Holt McCallany makes an uncredited appearance as a burglar .
Marc McClure , who portrayed Jimmy Olsen in the Christopher Reeve Superman film series , has a cameo as a police officer .
An unidentified Green Lantern appears at the beginning of the film , created by use of CGI and embodied by an uncredited actor .
Willem Dafoe and Kiersey Clemons filmed scenes as Nuidis Vulko and Iris West , although their roles were cut from the final film .
Both actors are signed for multiple films and set to appear in the future installments of the franchise .
Dafoe is set to appear in Aquaman and it was reported in November 2017 that the studio wanted to recast Clemons in a different role .
Laurence Fishburne , who portrays Perry White in the DC Extended Universe ( DCEU ) , said he declined to reprise his role in the film due to scheduling conflicts .
Early in production , a scene depicting Green Lanterns Kilowog and Tomar - Re visiting Batman was filmed as another post - credits scene , further teasing the upcoming Green Lantern Corps , but the scene was later scrapped .
In March 2016 , producer Charles Roven said that Green Lantern would not appear in any film before Justice League Part Two , and stated that they " could put Green Lantern in some introduction in Justice League 2 , or barring that , a movie after . "
Later , Snyder revealed that Orion Lee was cast to portray Ryan Choi in the film , setting up the character 's future as The Atom .
These scenes were cut from the theatrical film .
PRODUCTION
BACKGROUND
Section::::Production .
Section::::Background .
In February 2007 , it was announced that Warner Bros. had hired husband and wife
duo Michele and Kieran Mulroney to write a script for a Justice League film .
The news came around the same time that Joss Whedon 's long - developed Wonder Woman film was cancelled , as well as The Flash , written and directed by David S. Goyer .
Reportedly titled Justice League : Mortal , the script by Michele and Kiernan Mulroney was submitted to Warner Bros. in June 2007 , receiving positive feedback , which prompted the studio to immediately fast track production in the hope of beginning filming before the 2007–08 Writers Guild of America strike .
Warner Bros. was less willing to proceed with development of a sequel to Superman Returns , having been disappointed with its box office .
Brandon Routh was not approached to reprise the role of Superman in Justice League : Mortal , nor was Christian Bale from Batman Begins .
Warner Bros. intended for Justice League :
Mortal to be the start of a new film franchise , and to branch out into separate sequels and spin - offs .
Shortly after filming The Dark Knight , Bale stated in an interview that " It 'd be better if it does n't tread on the toes of what our Batman series is doing , " and felt it would make more sense for Warner Bros. to release the film after The Dark Knight Rises .
Jason Reitman was the original choice to direct Justice League , but he turned it down , as he considers himself an independent filmmaker and prefers to stay out of big budget superhero films .
George Miller signed to direct in September 2007 , with Barrie Osbourne producing on a projected $ 220 million budget .
The following month , roughly 40 actors and actresses auditioned for the ensemble superhero roles , among them Joseph Cross , Michael Angarano , Max Thieriot , Minka Kelly , Adrianne Palicki and Scott Porter .
Miller had intended to cast younger actors , as he wanted them to " grow " into their roles over the course of several films .
D. J. Cotrona was cast as Superman , along with Armie Hammer as Batman .
Jessica Biel reportedly declined to play Wonder Woman role after negotiations .
The character was also linked to actresses Teresa Palmer and Shannyn Sossamon , along with Mary Elizabeth Winstead , who confirmed that she had auditioned .
Ultimately , Megan Gale was cast as Wonder Woman , while Palmer was cast as Talia al Ghul , whom Miller had in mind to act with a Russian accent .
The script for Justice League : Mortal would have featured John Stewart as Green Lantern , a role originally offered to Columbus Short .
Hip hop recording artist and rapper Common was cast , with Adam Brody as Barry Allen / Flash , and Jay Baruchel as the lead villain , Maxwell Lord .
Longtime Miller collaborator Hugh Keays - Byrne had been cast in an unnamed role , rumored to be Martian Manhunter .
Santiago Cabrera was eventually revealed to be Aquaman after the film was cancelled .
Marit Allen was hired as the original costume designer before her untimely death in November 2007 , and the responsibilities were assumed by Weta Workshop .
However , the writers strike began that same month and placed the film on hold .
Warner Bros. had to let the options lapse for the cast , but development was fast tracked once more in February 2008 when the strike ended .
Warner Bros. and Miller wanted to start filming immediately , but production was pushed back three months .
Originally , the majority of Justice League : Mortal was to be shot at Fox Studios Australia in Sydney , with other locations scouted nearby at local colleges , and Sydney Heads doubling for Happy Harbor .
The Australian Film Commission had a say with casting choices , giving way for George Miller to cast Gale , Palmer and Keays - Bryne , all Australian natives .
The production crew was composed entirely of Australians , but the Australian government denied Warner Bros. a 40 percent tax rebate as they felt they had not hired enough Australian actors .
Miller was frustrated , stating that " A once - in - a - lifetime opportunity for the Australian film industry is being frittered away because of very lazy thinking .
They 're throwing away hundreds of millions of dollars of investment that the rest of the world is competing for and , much more significantly , highly skilled creative jobs .
" Production offices were then moved to Vancouver Film Studios in Canada .
Filming was pushed back to July 2008 , while Warner Bros was still confident they could produce the film for a summer 2009 release .
With production delays continuing , and the success of The Dark Knight in July 2008 , Warner Bros. decided to focus on the development of individual films featuring the main heroes , allowing director Christopher Nolan to separately complete his Batman trilogy with The Dark Knight Rises in 2012 .
Warner Bros. relaunched development for a solo Green Lantern film , released in 2011 as a critical and financial disappointment .
Meanwhile , film adaptations for The Flash and Wonder Woman continued to languish in development , while filming for a Superman reboot commenced in 2011 with Man of Steel , produced by Nolan and written by Batman screenwriter David S. Goyer .
In October 2012 , following its legal victory over Joe Shuster 's estate for the rights to Superman , Warner Bros. announced that it planned to move ahead with the Justice League film .
Shortly after filming on Man of Steel was complete , Warner Bros hired Will Beall to write the script for a new Justice League film .
Warner Bros. president Jeff Robinov explained that Man of Steel would be " setting the tone for what the movies are going to be like going forward .
In that , it 's definitely a first step .
"
The film included references to the existence of other superheroes in the DC Universe , and set the tone for a shared fictional universe of DC Comics characters on film .
Goyer stated that should Green Lantern appear in a future installment , it would be a rebooted version of the character , unconnected to the 2011 film .
With the release of Man of Steel in June 2013 , Goyer was hired to write a sequel , as well as a new Justice League , with the Beall draft being scrapped .
The sequel was later revealed to be , a team - up film featuring Henry Cavill as Superman , Ben Affleck as Batman , Gal Gadot as Wonder Woman , Ezra Miller as The Flash , Jason Momoa as Aquaman , and Ray Fisher as Victor Stone / Cyborg , the latter three in minor roles that became more significant in the Justice League film .
The universe is separate from Nolan and Goyer 's work on The Dark Knight trilogy , although Nolan was still involved as an executive producer for Batman v Superman .
In April 2014 , it was announced that Zack Snyder would also direct Goyer 's Justice League script .
Warner Bros. was reportedly courting Chris Terrio to rewrite Justice League the following July , after having been impressed with his rewrite of Batman v Superman : Dawn of Justice .
On October 15 , 2014 , Warner Bros. announced the film would be released in two parts , with Part One on November 17 , 2017 , and Part Two on June 14 , 2019 .
Snyder was set to direct both films .
In early July 2015 , EW revealed that the script for Justice League Part One had been completed by Terrio .
Zack Snyder stated that the film would be inspired by the New Gods comic series by Jack Kirby .
Although Justice League was initially announced as a two - part film , with the second part set for release two years after the first , Snyder stated in June 2016 that they would be two distinct , separate films and not one film split into two parts , both being stand - alone stories .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography commenced on April 11 , 2016 , with shooting taking place at Warner Bros. Studios , Leavesden , as well as various locations around London and Scotland .
Additional filming took place in Chicago , Illinois , Los Angeles , and Djúpavík , in the Westfjords of Iceland .
Snyder 's longtime cinematographer Larry Fong was replaced by Fabian Wagner due to scheduling conflicts .
Ben Affleck served as executive producer .
In May 2016 , it was revealed that Geoff Johns and Jon Berg would produce the Justice League films , and would also be in charge of the DC Extended Universe , after the largely negative critical reception of Batman v Superman : Dawn of Justice .
The same month , Irons stated that the Justice League storyline would be more linear and simple , compared to the theatrical version of Batman v Superman : Dawn of Justice .
Johns confirmed on June 3 , 2016 that the title of the film is Justice League , and later stated that the film would be " hopeful and optimistic " in comparison to previous DC Extended Universe ( DCEU ) films .
Justice League had a troubled production .
During filming , it was reported that the rewrites by Geoff Johns caused issues with Chris Terrio and Warner Bros. executives .
Warner Bros. was unsatisfied with how the film was shaping up under Snyder , because of the negative feedback that Batman v Superman received .
It was reported that Warner Bros. held a footage summit for writers that include Joss Whedon , Wonder Woman writer Allan Heinberg , Seth Grahame - Smith , and Andrea Berloff .
This caused numerous rewrites as Justice League was filming .
Whedon was eventually hired by Warner Bros. after Snyder stepped down for directorial duties during the post - production .
Filming wrapped in October 2016 .
POST - PRODUCTION Section::::Post - production .
In May 2017 , Snyder stepped down from directorial duties during post - production of the film to properly deal with the death of his daughter , Autumn Snyder .
Joss Whedon , whom Snyder had previously brought on to rewrite some additional scenes , took over to handle post - production duties in Snyder 's place .
In July 2017 , it was announced the film was undergoing two months of reshoots in London and Los Angeles , with Warner Bros. putting about $ 25 million into them , more than the typical $ 6–10 million additional filming costs , which brought the budget of the film up to $ 300 million .
The reshoots coincided with Cavill 's schedule for , for which he had grown a mustache which he was contracted to keep while filming .
While Fallout director Christopher McQuarrie initially gave the producers of Justice League permission to have Cavill shave the mustache in exchange for the $ 3 million it would cost to shut down production on Fallout and then digitally fill the mustache in , executives from Paramount Pictures rejected the idea .
Justice Leagues VFX team was then forced to used special effects to digitally remove the mustache in post - production .
In an interview , producer Charles Roven said : " Let 's just say 80 , 85 percent of the movie is what was originally shot .
There 's only so much you can do with other 15 , 20 percent of the movie " .
Whedon received a screenwriting credit on the film alongside Chris Terrio , while Snyder received sole director 's credit .
Warner Bros. CEO Kevin Tsujihara mandated the film to be under two hours .
The company also did not opt to delay of the film 's release despite the fact that there had been numerous problems in post - production , so that the executives will receive their cash bonuses before the company 's merger with AT&T.
In February 2018 , it was reported that Snyder was fired from directorial duties from Justice League , after his cut was deemed " unwatchable " according to Collider 's Matt Goldberg .
" I 'd heard similar things from separate sources over the last year as well , I also heard that Snyder 's rough - cut of the movie was ' unwatchable ' ( a word that jumped out at me because it 's rare
you hear two separate sources use exactly the same adjective ) .
Of course , even if that 's true , there 's obviously more to the story since rough cuts can be fixed up with reshoots , rewrites , etc .
" , Goldberg wrote .
According to DC Comics publisher , comic book artist Jim Lee , Snyder was not fired .
Speaking at the Calgary Comic and Entertainment Expo , Lee stated " that he ( Snyder ) was not fired at all and that he stepped down from the production due to a family matter " , as far as he knew .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
In March 2016 , Hans Zimmer , who co - composed the score for Man of Steel and Batman v Superman : Dawn of Justice , stated that he had officially retired from the " superhero business " .
Junkie XL , who wrote and composed the soundtrack of Batman v Superman : Dawn of Justice with Zimmer , was originally scoring the film .
In June 2017 , Danny Elfman was announced to have controversially replaced Junkie XL .
Elfman had previously composed the films Batman and Batman Returns , and the theme music for .
Elfman used the Batman theme music from the 1989 film Batman .
The John Williams ' Superman theme was used during " a dark , twisted moment " in the film , the time when a resurrected Superman fights the Justice League .
The film features a cover of Leonard Cohen 's " Everybody Knows " performed by Sigrid , " Icky Thump " performed by the White Stripes , and a cover of the Beatles ' " Come Together " performed by Gary Clark Jr. and Junkie XL .
WaterTower Music released the soundtrack album digitally on November 10 , 2017 , with a release of the physical format on December 8 .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film held its world premiere in Beijing on October 26 , 2017 , and was theatrically released in North America and elsewhere around the world in standard , RealD 3D and IMAX on November 17 , 2017 .
Its Japan premiere took place on November 20 , 2017 in Tokyo , with only Ezra Miller and Ray Fisher from the main cast attending .
In the United States , the film opened to 4,051 theaters in its widest release .
Justice League was shown in cinemas for 119 days ( 17 weeks ) .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
Superman was intentionally left out on all early Justice League marketing materials , including trailers , clips and posters , which actor Cavill commented as " ridiculous " .
Despite his character being hidden from promotional materials , Cavill still joined the rest of the cast on the film 's press tour .
Clark Kent was revealed in a final trailer before the release of the film , but edited in a way that writers felt Lois Lane was dreaming about Clark .
Sponsorship and marketing partners of the film included AT&T , Gillette , Mercedes - Benz , and TCL .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Justice League was released on digital download on February 13 , 2018 , and was released on Blu - ray Disc , Blu - ray 3D , 4 K Ultra - HD Blu - ray and DVD on March 13 , 2018 in various international markets .
The Blu - ray features two deleted scenes titled Return of Superman .
, it has made $ 12.1 million in DVD sales and $ 37.3 million in Blu - ray sales , totaling an estimated of $ 49.5 million .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Justice League grossed $ 229 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 428.9 million in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 657.9 million , against a production budget of $ 300 million .
It had a worldwide opening of $ 278.8 million , the 24th biggest of all - time .
Up against an estimated break - even point of as much as $ 750 million , Deadline Hollywood reported that the film lost the studio around $ 60 million .
Due to the film losing the studio money , the movie was deemed a " box office bomb " or " flop " .
In the United States and Canada , industry tracking initially forecast the film debuting to $ 110–120 million from 4,051 theaters ( including 400 IMAX screens ) .
It made $ 13 million from Thursday night previews , up from the $ 11 million made by Wonder Woman the previous June .
However , after making $ 38.8 million on its first day ( including Thursday previews ) , weekend projections were lowered to $ 95 million .
It ended up debuting to $ 93.8 million , down 45 % from Batman v Supermans opening of $ 166 million , and being the first film of the DCEU to open under $ 100 million .
Deadline attributed the low figure to lukewarm audience reaction to the film and most of its predecessors , as well as poor critical reception , and film review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes not posting their aggregated score until the day before release , causing speculation and doubt from filmgoers .
In its second weekend , the film dropped 56 % to $ 41.1 million , finishing second at the box office , behind newcomer Coco .
It was the second - best second weekend hold of the DCEU , behind Wonder Womans 43 % , but the lowest overall gross .
In its third week it again finished second behind Coco , grossing $ 16.7 million .
It made $ 9.7 million in its fourth week and $ 4.3 million in its fifth , finishing a respective second and fifth at the box office .
In 2018 , Forbes compared the drastic uncohesive shift from Snyder 's darker films Man of Steel and Batman v Superman to the lighter Justice League ( co - written by Whedon ) , to the similarly drastic and uncohesive change in tone experienced from the older 1989 and 1992 Tim Burton 's Batman films to the direct light - hearted sequels directed by Schumacher , although nothing the former shift in tone was better received than the one in Justice League , affecting box office , due to going against the expectations of Snyder fans in its attempt to reach a higher demographic , while alienating its own established core audience .
Internationally , the film was projected to debut to $ 215–235 million for a worldwide opening of $ 325–355 million .
It made $ 8.5 million on its first day from nine countries , including South Korea , France and Brazil .
It ended up having a $ 185 million international debut from 65 countries , including $ 57.1 million from China , $ 9.8 million from the United Kingdom , $ 9.6 million from Mexico and $ 8.8 million from South Korea .
The film broke a record in the Philippines with a debut of $ 1.12 M ( PHP 57.3 M ) , making it the biggest industry opening day for a film there in 2017 .
In Brazil , the film opened to $ 14.2 million , the biggest opening in the country 's history .
Outside North America , the films largest markets were China ( $ 106 million ) , Brazil ( $ 41 million ) , Mexico ( $ 24.8 million ) , and United Kingdom ( $ 24 million ) .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Justice League received mixed reviews .
It was praised for its action sequences and acting ( primarily by Gadot and Miller ) but criticized for the screenplay , pacing and CGI , as well as its thin plot , and the underdeveloped villain .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 40 % , based on 326 reviews , with an average rating of 5.3/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Justice League leaps over a number of DC movies , but its single bound is n't enough to shed the murky aesthetic , thin characters , and chaotic action that continue to dog the franchise . "
Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned the film a score of 45 out of 100 , based on 52 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B+ " on an A+ to F scale , while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave it an 85 % overall positive score ( average 4 out of 5 stars ) and a 69 % " definite recommend " .
Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun - Times gave the film 3.5 out of 4 stars , praising the cast , especially Gadot , and saying " It 's a putting - the - band - together origins movie , executed with great fun and energy . "
Owen Gleiberman of Variety gave the film a positive review and wrote , " Justice League ... has been conceived , in each and every frame , to correct the sins of Batman v Superman .
It 's not just a sequel — it 's an act of franchise penance .
The movie ... is never messy or bombastic .
It 's light and clean and simple ( at times almost too simple ) , with razory repartee and combat duels that make a point of not going on for too long . "
Bilge Ebiri of the Village Voice similarly gave it a positive review : " ...
action scenes start and stop and then start again , then go in different directions , and it was a few moments into the Big Climactic Face - Off before I realized we 'd arrived at the Big Climactic Face - Off .
But these off - kilter rhythms actually lend the film a pleasant unpredictability .
As does the humor , which often sits uneasily next to the moodiness , but is somehow fast and witty enough to work . "
Writing for Rolling Stone , Peter Travers gave the film 2.5 out of 4 stars , praising the cast but criticizing the action sequences and writing , saying : " The scenes of the League members together , bickering and bonding , spike the film with humor and genuine feeling , creating a rooting interest in the audience .
Without it , the film would crumble . "
Conversely , Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter , while praising Gadot and Miller , called the film visually ugly and boring , saying , " Fatigue , repetition and a laborious approach to exposition are the keynotes of this affair , which is also notable for how Ben Affleck , donning the bat suit for the second time , looks like he 'd rather be almost anywhere else but here . "
Sara Stewart of the New York Post gave the film 1.5 out of 4 stars : " Justice League is a pointless flail of expensive ( yet somehow cheap - looking ) CGI that no amount of tacked - on quips , or even Gadot 's luminescent star power , can rescue .
Like Cyborg ( Ray Fisher ) , one of its ostensible heroes , Justice League is patched together from disparate elements .
Original director Zack Snyder left partway through due to a death in the family , leaving Joss Whedon to finish up .
The result ?
All the plodding , gray , generic action of a Snyder film with stabs of Whedonian humor that almost never feel organic .
There 's no sense of purpose here , not even a sense of place . "
Writing for The Washington Post , Alyssa Rosenberg also returned with a negative review : " ... if Justice League is a symbol of just how entrenched superhero movies have become in the Hollywood ecosystem , it 's also a potent illustration that success has n't necessarily artistically elevated the genre .
It 's not just that , beat by beat , Justice League feels nearly identical to so many of the superhero movies that have come before , or that it features some of the ugliest , most pointless special effects I 've seen at the movies in a long time .
It 's that the darn thing feels depressingly haphazard and thoughtless , and that it 's guaranteed to make a ton of money anyway .
Superhero fans are a ridiculously powerful market ; they deserve better than this . "
James Berardinelli gave it 2 out of 4 stars : " When Marvel mapped out the trajectory for their Cinematic Universe , they were sometimes criticized for overthinking and overplanning .
Nearly every major hero – Iron Man , Hulk , Captain America , Thor – had his own movie .
Many of the secondary characters ( including the villain ) boasted significant screen time in one or more of the first five films .
Only once all these things had been accomplished were the characters brought together for The Avengers .
The formula worked .
The Avengers was popcorn bliss , a superhero nirvana .
DC , however , came late to the party .
Riding the critical and popular success of Christopher Nolan 's Batman trilogy and smarting from the disappointing performance of Bryan Singer 's Superman Returns , they dithered and dallied and did n't begin planning out the post - Dark Knight campaign until the MCU movie count was past the half - dozen mark and rising .
The late start resulted in a rushed and ununified approach .
Justice League arrives with three major characters who have n't previously been introduced .
As a result , this film has a lot of heavy background lifting to do - too much , in fact , for it to be able to tell a worthwhile story .
70 % of the movie is set - up for future tales .
The rest is an overlong smack - down between our heroes and possibly the worst villain ever to appear in a comic book picture . "
Writing for the Film Ireland Magazine , Ellen Murray found the characters interesting , but their setting unworthy : " ... there is something undeniably thrilling in seeing these iconic characters work together on the big screen .
It 's just a shame that their current incarnation , moulded in Zack Snyder 's vision , lacks a strong framework to allow them to better shine .
The characters save the film from being a complete and utter disaster , but they alone ca n't save it from being a mild disaster .
While undoubtedly Snyder is genuinely passionate about these characters , he seems to suffer from a fundamental misunderstanding of what they represent and , most importantly , what cinema - goers expect from a story involving them .
Justice League understands that a character like Superman means something to people ; it just ca n't show us convincingly why " .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
Justice League was short - listed as a potential candidate for the 90th Academy Award for Best Visual Effects , along with another DC Extended Universe ( DCEU ) film , Wonder Woman
COMMUNITY REACTION
Section::::Community reaction .
The divisive reaction towards the final high - lighted cut of the film , with Zack Snyder leaving directorial duties and the final cut of the film in the hands of Joss Whedon , has led some fans to compare the situation to the one experienced by the film Superman II , when it changed director , despite being almost completely filmed .
Although Snyder left to recover from his daughter 's suicide , Richard Donner left Superman II due to spending too much money filming Superman 1 and 2 back to back , before even releasing the first film .
Richard Donner got to complete his Superman II cut in 2005 , about two decades after the release of the final cut that excluded him .
In the belief that Snyder had shot enough material , some fans have campaigned for a Snyder cut , allowing Snyder to receive a similar treatment to Donner , while refusing to accept Justice League 's theatrical cut .
However it was noted that Donner 's Superman films , were significantly better received than Zack Snyder 's , and the possibility that a Snyder cut would be as poorly received as his previous DC efforts , rendering the assembly effort pointless .
However fans also argue that Snyder 's vision would be more cohesive to the previous films than the actual theatrical cut , which Snyder has refused to see .
Snyder 's interest in editing it and Warner Bros 's refusal to confirm whether Snyder shot enough material , keep fans speculating whether it 's possible or not .
However , Warner Bros has denied any intention of making a Snyder cut .
FUTURE Section::::Future .
A sequel was scheduled to be released in June 2019 but has since been delayed to accommodate the release for a standalone Batman film .
By March 2017 , producer Charles Roven announced that Zack Snyder would return as director .
In October 2017 , J. K. Simmons stated that the studio is working on the script of the sequel , alongside The Batman .
Shortly after the release of Justice League , Henry Cavill stated that he is under contract with Warner Bros. to play Superman for one more film .
In December 2017 , it was reported that there were " no immediate plans " for Zack Snyder to direct a Justice League sequel , or any other DC films , with Snyder instead being relegated to an executive producer position .
This comes after a reshuffling of film production staff at Warner Bros. due to the film 's mixed critical reception and disappointing financial performance .
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS