POWER RANGERS ( FILM )
Saban 's Power Rangers , or simply Power Rangers , is a 2017 American superhero film based on the franchise of the same name , directed by Dean Israelite and written by John Gatins .
It is the third Power Rangers film , and is a reboot .
The film features the main characters of the Mighty Morphin Power Rangers television series with a new cast , starring Dacre Montgomery , Naomi Scott , RJ Cyler , Becky G , Ludi Lin , Bill Hader , Bryan Cranston , and Elizabeth Banks .
It is the first blockbuster film to feature LGBTQ and autistic superheroes .
Franchise creator Haim Saban returned to produce the film under his investment firm .
The film premiered at the Regency Village Theater in Los Angeles on March 22 , 2017 , and was released in the United States on March 24 , 2017 .
It was met with mixed reviews upon release , with criticism primarily focusing on its uneven tone , product placement and divergences from its source material , but praise aimed at the performances ( particularly Montgomery 's and Cyler 's ) .
It was also a box office disappointment , grossing $ 142 million worldwide against a budget of $ 105 million .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In the Cenozoic era , six interplanetary warriors , the Power Rangers , are tasked with protecting life on Earth and the Zeo Crystal .
The Green Ranger , Rita Repulsa , betrays them and plans to dominate the universe .
The Red Ranger , Zordon , survives Rita 's attack and hides five of the Rangers ' power source , the Power Coins .
He orders Alpha 5 , his robotic assistant , to perform a meteor strike that kills him , the dinosaurs , and sends Rita to the bottom of the sea , foiling her scheme .
In 21st - century Angel Grove , high school football star Jason Scott is dismissed from the team and placed under house arrest after a failed prank .
In detention , he encounters Billy Cranston and Kimberly Hart .
After defending Billy from a bully , Billy offers to deactivate Jason 's ankle monitor for help at an old gold mine that evening .
Once there , Jason leaves to explore and runs into Kimberly .
Billy detonates explosives to break some rock , attracting the attention of Jason , Kimberly and nearby students Trini and Zack .
The five discover the Power Coins and each take one .
While escaping mine security , their car is hit by a train .
The five find themselves at home the next morning and discover that the coins have granted them superhuman abilities .
Elsewhere , Rita 's body is found .
Waking , she goes on a rampage , hunting pieces of gold to raise her minion Goldar to find the Zeo Crystal .
The five teenagers return to the mine and discover an ancient spaceship where they meet Alpha 5 and Zordon 's consciousness .
They inform the teenagers about the Rangers history and Rita , warning that they have eleven days until Rita has her full power , finds the Zeo Crystal , and uses it to destroy life on Earth .
The five leave the ship with no intention of returning until Zordon pleads with Jason to convince the team .
The five return to train the next day , but they can not morph .
They spend the next week training against simulated Putties and trying unsuccessfully to morph .
To inspire the Rangers , Alpha reveals the Zords .
Zack takes his Zord out for a joyride and almost kills the other Rangers when he crashes it .
This angers Jason , and they fight .
While trying to separate the two , Billy spontaneously morphs .
However , when he becomes conscious of it , the armor disappears .
Angered at their lack of progress , Zordon dismisses the group .
Jason returns to the ship to confront Zordon and discovers that once the Rangers morph , it will open the Morphing Grid and allow Zordon to restore himself in a physical body .
Feeling betrayed , Jason accuses Zordon of using the team for his own benefit .
That night , the team camp at the mine and bond with each other .
Later that night , Rita attacks Trini and orders her to bring the Rangers to the docks .
Trini informs them about Rita and they arrive to fight , but are quickly defeated .
Rita forces Billy to reveal the location of the Zeo Crystal , which he 'd figured out , kills him , and releases the others .
The Rangers take Billy 's body to the ship and ask Zordon to resurrect him .
The Rangers agree they would give their lives for each other and resolve to defeat Rita .
In doing so , they unlock the Morphing Grid .
Zordon revives
Billy , sacrificing being able to restore his physical self .
With the team restored and confident , the Rangers morph into their armor .
Rita creates Goldar , raises an army of Putties , and attacks Angel Grove to find the Zeo Crystal .
The Rangers battle the Putties and head to Angel Grove in their Zords .
After the Rangers destroy the Putties , Goldar pushes the Rangers and their Zords into a fiery pit .
In the pit , the Zords combine and form the Megazord .
Rita merges with Goldar .
The Rangers battle and destroy Goldar .
After refusing Jason 's offer to surrender , a defiant Rita tells the Rangers that more will come for the crystal and leaps at the Megazord only to be slapped into space .
The Rangers are praised as local heroes , and with Rita 's threats foiled , they return to their normal lives while keeping their powers .
In a mid - credits scene , in detention , the teacher announces that Tommy Oliver will be joining them , but the desk is empty save for a green jacket .
CAST
THE POWER RANGERS * Dacre Montgomery as Jason Scott / Red Ranger , the leader of the Power Rangers .
Jason was the former star quarterback of Angel Grove High School 's football team before a failed prank led to a run - in with the law .
* Naomi Scott as Kimberly Hart / Pink Ranger , a former cheerleader .
Kimberly took part in a cyberbullying incident by spreading a private image of her friend around school .
* RJ Cyler as Billy Cranston / Blue Ranger , an autistic and intelligent loner .
Billy is the classic nerd who has become a bully magnet .
* Becky G as Trini Kwan / Yellow Ranger , a new girl in town who is struggling to make friends and having difficulty relating to her family .
She is also questioning her sexual orientation .
* Ludi Lin as Zack Taylor / Black Ranger , a bilingual teen .
Zack 's mother is sick , and he lives in fear that he will return home one day to find her dead .
ALLIES AND VILLAINS
* Bill Hader as the voice of Alpha 5 :
The robot assistant to Zordon .
* Bryan Cranston as Zordon : He is the Power Rangers ' mentor and former Red Ranger .
Zordon lived millions of years ago before his consciousness became a part of the Morphing Grid at the time of his death .
* Elizabeth Banks as Rita Repulsa : Millions of years old , she is the former Green Ranger who went rogue and killed her old team before being temporarily subdued by Zordon .
She works to form the monster Goldar while attempting to steal the Zeo Crystal , an artifact that channels the Morphing Grid , a dimension that gives the Power Rangers their powers .
* Fred Tatasciore as the voice of Goldar , a gigantic winged monster made of gold .
*
Tatasciore also provides the vocal effects of the Putties who are depicted as stone golems that can be made from any Earth element .
SUPPORTING * David Denman as Sam Scott , Jason 's father .
* Caroline Cave as Beverly Scott , Jason 's mother .
* Anjali Jay as Maddy Hart , Kimberly 's mother .
* Patrick Sabongui as Trini 's father .
* Erica Cerra as Trini 's mother .
* Kayden Magnuson as Pearl Scott , Jason 's sister .
* Fiona Fu as Zack 's mother .
* Sarah Grey as Amanda Clark * Emily Maddison as Rebecca * Wesley MacInnes as Colt Wallace , a school bully who is constantly picking on Billy .
* Jaime Callica as Officer Bebe
*
Matt Shively as Damo * Garry Chalk as Captain Bowen Section::::Cast .
Section::::Supporting .
Jason David Frank and Amy Jo Johnson , two of the cast members of the original TV series , make cameo appearances as Angel Grove citizens .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Saban Capital Group and Lionsgate announced the film in May 2014 , with Roberto Orci originally attached to produce .
Ashley Miller and Zack Stentz were hired to write the film 's script .
Orci eventually left the project to work on Star Trek Beyond .
On April 10 , 2015 , TheWrap reported that Dean Israelite was in negotiations to direct the film .
Israelite told IGN in an interview that the film would be " completely playful , and it needs to be really fun and funny .
But like Project Almanac , it 's going to feel very grounded at the same time , and very contemporary and have a real edge to it , and a real gut to it , it 's going to be a fun , joyful [ movie ] but one that feels completely grounded in a real world , with real characters going through real things " .
Brian Tyler was brought on to compose the film 's music .
Israelite has said that the film updates itself from the original series , being more character - driven and incorporating naturalism and a grounded nature .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Actors began testing for the roles of the five Power Rangers on October 2 , 2015 .
On October 7 , 2015 , Naomi Scott was cast as Kimberly .
Newcomers Dacre Montgomery , Ludi Lin and RJ Cyler were then cast as Jason , Zack , and Billy , respectively .
At the month 's end , Becky G was chosen to play Trini .
When it came to casting the Rangers , director Dean Israelite said , " From the very beginning , diversity was a very important part of the whole process , " and that while the characters ' races were switched around , he added that , " We made sure that the essence of each of those characters are who they were in the original show , and this really will be an origin story of those characters . "
On February 2 , 2016 , it was announced that Elizabeth Banks would portray Rita Repulsa .
Four months later , Bryan Cranston , who voiced Twin Man and Snizard in the original series , announced he was cast as Zordon .
Cranston revealed that he would perform motion - capture and CGI .
In September 2016 , Walter Emanuel Jones , the actor who played Zack in the original series , stated none of the original cast would cameo in the film .
Towards the end of the month , comedian Bill Hader was cast as Alpha 5 .
In March 2017 , it was reported that Amy Jo Johnson and Jason David Frank , who played Kimberly and Tommy in the original series , would cameo in the film , despite Jones ' earlier comments .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Filming was originally set to begin in January 2016 but was rescheduled and began on February 29 in Vancouver .
On May 28 , 2016 , filming was complete .
Additional filming occurred in October 2016 .
A cast member claims that the film has broken the record for the longest wire jump , but this has not been independently confirmed .
The film was released in Dolby Vision and Dolby Atmos sound .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The official soundtrack , with music by Brian Tyler , was released digitally on March 24 , 2017 , and on CD on April 4 , distributed by Varèse Sarabande .
Track listing RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Originally scheduled for release on July 22 , 2016 , Lionsgate delayed it to March 24 , 2017 .
The film received its world premiere in Berlin , Germany on March 17 , 2017 .
All five of the surviving actors who originally portrayed the Rangers in the series attended the film 's Los Angeles premiere on March 22 , 2017 .
It was the first time they had been together publicly since 1995 .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
On March 3 , 2016 , Lionsgate released the first official photo of the five Rangers , and the following month , the company released the first official photo of Banks as Rita Repulsa .
On May 5 , the company unveiled the first official images of the Rangers ' suits .
Speaking of the suits , director Dean Israelite said that " The show was about kids coming of age , about metamorphosis , these suits needed to feel like they were catalyzed by these kids and their energy , their spirit " , while production designer Andrew Menzies commented that the new suits are " an alien costume that grows on them , that 's not man - made .
You ca n't win everyone over , but we are trying to appeal to a more mature audience and gain new fans .
"
A teaser poster was released in June , with additional character posters released in July , September , and October .
On October 8 , 2016 , a Discover The Power teaser trailer for the film was released .
A fictional Angel Grove High School Newspaper website was created , alongside the official Power Rangers website , which features a GIF creator that allows users to make a GIF out of scenes from the teaser trailer .
There is also an official toyline , produced by Bandai , and an extensive merchandising range was produced to promote the film .
Max Landis , who was fired from writing the film , criticized the trailer , saying that it looked like Chronicle , a film that he had written .
The trailer garnered mixed reactions , with some praising it for its darker , contemporary reimagining of the classic characters , while still looking action - packed and fun at the same time , and others criticizing it for its lack of connection to the original series , saying it appeared " brooding " .
The trailer received over 150 million views in the first two days after it was uploaded .
Lionsgate revealed the T - Rex zord toy , among others , on October 28 , 2016 , and the Power Rangers Twitter account revealed the Megazord toy on November 4 , 2016 .
On November 15 , 2016 , Lionsgate revealed the toys based on the film 's individual Zords .
On December 8 , 2016 , a new poster debuted , as well as a photo of Rita Repulsa .
On December 19 , 2016 , Lionsgate and Boom !
Studios announced that they would release a graphic novel titled Power Rangers : Aftershock , set immediately after the events of the movie .
An international trailer was released on December 22 , 2016 .
Qualcomm and Lionsgate produced a virtual reality mobile app of the film Power Rangers Movie Command Center that was exhibited at the CES 2017 , from January 5–8 , 2017 , and was released in the App Store on March 8 , 2017 .
On January 19 , a second trailer , titled It 's Morphin Time ! , was released .
Lionsgate debuted yet another trailer , which it called the All - Star Trailer , on February 17 .
New TV spots were released on February 27 , two about the Power Rangers , and one about Rita Repulsa .
A clip was released on March 6 , followed by two more on March 9 .
Thirty - seven stills were then released .
Another TV spot was released on March 10 .
In the final week before the movie premiered , two more clips , as well as photos , were released .
A Build - A - Bear Workshop Power Ranger product range was announced on March 9 , 2017 .
Krispy Kreme released doughnuts to promote the film , and served as an advertising partner .
Placement of Krispy Kreme products and locations were featured in the film numerous times .
The group collaborated with YouTube sports entertainment group Dude Perfect ahead of the film 's release , in a video titled Dude Perfect vs. Power Rangers .
VIDEO GAME Section::::Video game .
Lionsgate and Saban , in collaboration with nWay Games , released a PvP fighting mobile game called on March 24 , 2017 , to coincide with the film 's release .
The game was featured on both Android and the Apple Store and got to the top spot on the Apple App Store for both iPhones and iPads , for two consecutive days and number two on the Google Play Store .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Power Rangers was released on Digital HD on June 13 , 2017 , and was followed by a release on Ultra HD , Blu - ray and DVD on June 27 , 2017 with retail exclusive variants being made available at Best Buy , Target and Wal - Mart .
The film debuted at the No . 1 spot on the NPD VideoScan overall disc sales chart , which tracks combined DVD and Blu - ray Disc sales ; NPD 's dedicated Blu - ray Disc sales chart ; and Home Media Magazine 's video rental chart for the week ending July 2 , 2017 .
The film retained the top spot on the NPD VideoScan 's overall disc sales chart for the week ending on July 9 , 2017 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Power Rangers grossed $ 85.4 million in the United States and Canada and $ 57 million in other territories for a worldwide gross of $ 142.3 million , against a production budget of $ 100 million .
In the United States and Canada , Power Rangers opened alongside Life , CHiPs and Wilson , and was projected to gross $ 30–35 million from 3,693 theaters on its opening weekend .
The film made $ 3.6 million from Thursday night previews and $ 15 million on its first day .
It went on to debut to $ 40.3 million , finishing second at the box office behind Beauty and the Beast ( $ 90.4 million ) .
The audience was notably diverse and mostly 18–34 years old .
In its second weekend the film grossed $ 14.5 million ( a drop of 64 % ) , finishing 4th at the box office .
In June 2017 , Dean Israelite said that the film 's PG-13 rating probably contributed to the film 's underperformance at the box office .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Power Rangers received mixed reviews from critics .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 46 % based on 149 reviews , and an average rating of 5.1/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Power Rangers has neither the campy fun of its TV predecessor nor the blockbuster action of its cinematic superhero competitors , and sadly never quite manages to shift into turbo for some good old - fashioned morphin time . "
On Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating , the film has a score 44 out of 100 , based on 30 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A " on an A+ to F scale , while PostTrak reported 66 % of audience members gave the film a " definite recommend " .
IGN gave the film a 7/10 , saying , " Power Rangers does n't quite pull off everything it wants to , but it 's a fun time at the theater nonetheless . "
Mike McCahill of The Guardian wrote that " the film achieves a functioning mediocrity we perhaps might have thought beyond this franchise , " and gave it 2 out of 5 stars .
Mike Ryan of Uproxx gave the film a negative review , writing : " Power Rangers has one of the most zig - zagged tones of any big budget studio film I 've seen in a long time .
It 's jarring at times how often it goes back and forth between ' gritty ' and ' silly ' .
" Writing for Variety , Owen Gleiberman also criticized the film 's conflicting tones , saying : " ... 25 years ago , Mighty Morphin Power Rangers was launched as superhero fodder for kids , and there was indeed a place for it , but we 're now so awash in superhero culture that kids no longer need the safe , lame , pandering junior - league version of it .
They can just watch Ant - Man or the PG-13 Suicide Squad .
Safe , lame , and pandering have all grown up .
"
In a review for The Telegraph , Robbie Collin gave it 1/5 stars , criticizing the " abjectly embarrassing frenzy of product placement " .
ACCOLADES
Teen Choice Awards
PLANNED FRANCHISE
Section::::Planned franchise .
In a May 2016 conference call to analysts , Lionsgate CEO Jon Feltheimer stated , " We could see doing five or six or seven . "
On March 22 , 2017 , Haim Saban said that he and Lionsgate already have a six - film story arc .
However in May 2017 , Forbes noted that due to the underwhelming performance of the film in most markets , it was unlikely any sequels would be made .
Later that same month , it was reported that the sequels could still be made thanks to record - breaking merchandise sales .
Prior to the home release of the movie , Israelite confirmed that talks were taking place regarding a sequel and that he would like to include Lord Zedd in it .
The possibility of a sequel increased once more in early July 2017 when it was reported that the film held the number one spot in home media sales and rentals in its first week .
In August 2017 , Saban abandoned its trademark for the film 's logo .
A Saban Brands representative stated in October 2017 that " Power Rangers continues to own and renew hundreds of trademark registrations worldwide , including for the 2017 movie logo .
The trademark registration process is very nuanced , and the status of the single application has no bearing on our ownership of or the future plans for Power Rangers .
The franchise remains as strong and enthusiastic about its future as ever .
"
On May 1 , 2018 , Saban Brands agreed to sell Power Rangers and other entertainment assets to Hasbro ( who came close but failed to buy Lionsgate ) for US$ 522 million in cash and stock with the sale expect to closed in the second quarter .
On August 8 , 2018 , Hasbro announced they would be working with a film studio ( it 's unclear if it would be Lionsgate ) to develop a follow - up to Power Rangers .
NOTES REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* PR Mini Production Notes FINAL ( ) * PR Production Notes 2 ( ) EXTERNAL LINKS