PETE 'S DRAGON ( 2016 FILM )
Pete 's Dragon is a 2016 American fantasy comedy - drama adventure film directed by David Lowery , written by Lowery and Toby Halbrooks , and produced by James Whitaker .
The film is a live - action reimagining of Disney 's 1977 live - action / animated musical film of the same name written by Malcolm Marmorstein .
The film stars Bryce Dallas Howard , Oakes Fegley , Wes Bentley , Karl Urban , Oona Laurence , and Robert Redford .
The film tells the story of an orphaned feral boy who befriends a dragon in the Pacific Northwest , and the ensuing repercussions of their discovery by the town 's local residents .
Pete 's Dragon premiered at the El Capitan Theatre on August 8 , 2016 and was theatrically released by Walt Disney Pictures in the United States in 2D , Disney Digital
3-D , and RealD 3D formats on August 12 , 2016 .
The film received positive reviews from critics and has grossed $ 144 million worldwide against a $ 65 million production budget .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1977 , Pete Healy , a five - year - old boy , is on a road trip with his parents when their car flips off the road following a near - collision with a deer .
Pete 's mom and dad are killed , but Pete survives the accident and is chased into the forest by a pack of wolves .
He is rescued by a huge dragon with green fur , yellow eyes , and wings .
The dragon quickly bonds with Pete and becomes protective of the boy .
Pete names the dragon " Elliot " after the character of a lost puppy from his favorite book .
Six years later , Pete , now 11 , spots a lumberjack crew chopping down trees near his home .
Natalie , the daughter of the ethical site foreman Jack , spots and chases him .
When Natalie accidentally falls from a tree , her screams attract her father Jack and his girlfriend , park ranger Grace Meacham .
Pete tries to run away , but Gavin , Jack 's pragmatic brother , accidentally knocks him unconscious .
After realizing that Pete has vanished , Elliot stumbles around looking for him and ends up knocking over a tree near the lumber camp , leading Gavin to organize a hunting party to find him .
Meanwhile , Pete wakes up in a local hospital , which he escapes in an effort to return to the forest .
Before the police can catch the boy , Grace finds Pete and asks him to come to her home and promises to take him to the forest the next day .
Gavin and his men locate Pete and Elliot 's treehouse , but when they try to search it , Elliot reveals himself and scares them away .
He follows them to town trying to find Pete .
After seeing Pete settling in with Grace 's family , he leaves .
After Pete gives Grace a drawing of Elliot , she shows her father , Mr. Meacham .
He says that he discovered the same dragon as a young man .
He advises her to trust Pete , and to find Elliot .
The next day , Pete , Grace , Natalie , and Mr. Meacham travel to the forest to meet Elliot .
A group of hunters led by Gavin surprise Elliot and shoot him with tranquilizer darts , then lock him up in Jack 's warehouse .
Before the authorities can inspect the dragon , Pete and Natalie free him from his chains and escape on a lumber truck with Mr. Meacham .
Angered , Gavin sets up a roadblock at the bridge to stop them .
When Elliot tries to fly , he crashes into the truck , damaging its brakes
and it goes through the barricade .
Confused and frightened , Elliot perches on top of the bridge and starts breathing fire at the police .
The bridge begins to collapse under the intense heat , causing Grace and Jack 's truck to fall through .
Gavin tries to save the pair from falling to their deaths .
Elliot emerges from the ravine with Grace and Jack riding safely on his back .
With a firefighting helicopter approaching , Pete decides to flee with Elliot back to the woods .
Pete pleads with Elliot to let him stay so he can protect him from his attackers , just as Elliot protected him .
However , Elliot concludes that as long as they stay close together , Pete will always be in danger .
He points out Pete 's book to encourage him to return to stay with Grace and Jack .
Pete is reluctant & worried for Elliott 's safety , but ultimately trusts the dragon 's judgment .
After a very tearful hug , Elliot returns to the mountains and Pete returns to live with Grace and Jack as his new family .
In the years that follow , Grace and Jack marry and adopt Pete as their son .
Not only has Elliot slowly faded from the town 's memory , but Gavin has learned to be more scrupulous and has moved on from the experience .
Pete and his family eventually go on vacation , and see that Elliot is finally reunited with his fellow dragons .
CAST * Bryce Dallas Howard as Grace Meacham , a forest ranger .
* Oakes Fegley as Pete Healy , a young orphan who lives in the forest with Elliot the Dragon .
* Levi Alexander as 5-year - old Pete * Wes Bentley as Jack Magary , a widowed lumber mill owner who is Natalie 's father and Grace 's boyfriend .
He has a moral compass and tries to restrain his brother Gavin 's more unethical tendencies .
* Karl Urban as Gavin Magary , a hunter and lumberjack who is Jack 's brother and Natalie 's uncle .
He is a pragmatic man who chafes under his brother 's scruples .
* Oona Laurence as Natalie Magary , Jack 's daughter and Gavin 's niece .
* Robert Redford as Mr. Meacham , Grace 's father * Isiah Whitlock Jr. as Sheriff Gene Dentler * Marcus Henderson as Woodrow , a lumberjack * Aaron Jackson as Abner , a lumberjack * Phil Grieve as Bobby , a lumberjack * Jim McLarty as Ranger Wentworth * Ian Harcourt as Deputy West
* Steve Barr as Deputy Smalls
* John Kassir as the voice of Elliot the Dragon
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
In March 2013 , Walt Disney Pictures announced it would remake Pete 's Dragon , as a non - musical , dramatic film to be written by David Lowery and Toby Halbrooks , and directed by Lowery .
Disney intended to rework the core story as a dramatic story , rather than a musical .
It set the new work in the Pacific Northwest of the early 1980s , rather than the Northern New England of the early 1900s in the 1977 film .
The film was shot in live - action using Panavision Panaflex cameras .
The dragon , Elliot , was entirely animated by Weta Digital in CGI , instead of the original hand - drawn animation .
On September 19 , 2014 , Disney cast Oakes Fegley and Oona Laurence to star as Pete and Natalie .
On October 2 , Barrie M. Osborne was set to be the executive producer for the film .
On October 16 , Robert Redford was in early talks to play a local storyteller who remembers seeing a dragon in the woods .
On November 20 , Bryce Dallas Howard was in talks for the female lead role , a forest ranger who finds the boy and does not believe his stories about a dragon .
On January 7 , 2015 , Wes Bentley joined the cast of the film .
On January 9 , Michael C. Hall was also added to the cast .
On January 29 , Karl Urban replaced Hall .
Principal photography commenced in January 2015 in New Zealand , with Lowery directing .
Rehearsals began early January 2015 , while news reported the beginning of the shooting on January 26 , 2015 , set to last through April .
Live - action filming locations included Bay of Plenty , Taupo and Wellington , while CGI was done at Stone Street Studios .
On February 10 , 2015 , a press release confirmed that principal photography had commenced .
Shooting took place in and around Wellington and Rotorua , before transferring to Tapanui , where the old Blue Mountain Lumber mill was used as the mill in the film , and the main street became Millhaven for two weeks .
Production concluded on April 30 , 2015 .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
Academy Award - winning composer Howard Shore was originally chosen to write the music for the film .
He was replaced during post - production by Daniel Hart , who had previously worked with director Lowery on other films , most notably
Ai n't Them Bodies Saints ( 2013 ) .
The soundtrack was released on August 12 , 2016 by Walt Disney Records .
Candle on the Water was the only original song to be featured on the 2016 soundtrack from the 1977 soundtrack .
Though the song was not used in the film , it was re - recorded by Okkervil River for the 2016 soundtrack .
The original version , performed by Australian singer Helen Reddy ( who played Nora in the original film ) , was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Song in 1977 .
TRACK LISTING
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Pete 's Dragon grossed $ 76.2 million in North America and $ 67.5 million in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 143.7 million , against a budget of $ 65 million .
In the United States and Canada , Pete 's Dragon opened on August 12 , 2016 , across 3,702 theaters , of which 2,884 were in 3D , and 150 were premium large - format screens , as well as in 57 D - Box and 16 Dolby Cinema sites .
It was projected to gross $ 20–25 million in its opening weekend .
The film did not have Thursday night previews , and made $ 7 million on its first day , Friday .
In its opening weekend , it earned $ 21.5 million , finishing third at the box office , behind Suicide Squad and Sausage Party .
The opening was reminiscent of Disney 's July release The BFG , which also carried strong reviews into the weekend only to deliver $ 18.7 million in its first three days , and far from the $ 67–116 million debuts of other Disney live action - adaptations , such as Cinderella , Maleficent , , The Jungle Book and Alice in Wonderland .
However , many box office critics did not worry about the opening figure , given the film 's modest budget , and the fact that the film is not anywhere near as well known as those films ' respective source material .
Disney 's distribution chief Dave Hollis was optimistic that film would become profitable by saying , " People who are coming out of the theater are just loving it and their advocacy is going to help us put together a nice , solid run . "
Forbes noted that the film did not have any box office draws other than the stellar reviews and the notion of another Disney " live - action fairy tale . "
Although the film witnessed a steep decline on its second Friday ( -55 % ) , it fell just by 47.2 % on its second weekend , grossing $ 11.3 million .
On its third weekend , it fell just by 35 % , grossing $ 7.3 million .
The following weekend , Pete 's Dragon declined only 14.7 % , grossing $ 6.5 million and moved up to fourth place .
Outside North America , Pete 's Dragon received a scattered release pattern .
The film was released day - and - date in conjucture with its U.S. premiere in 12 markets ( roughly 30 % of the overseas market ) , including the United Kingdom , Italy , and Russia .
It earned a total of $ 5.3 million , with Russia ( $ 1.5 million ) , Italy ( $ 1.4 million ) and the U.K. ( $ 1.1 million ) representing its largest takings .
Moreover , it also opened in France ( $ 1.8 million ) .
It had just a 1 % drop in attendance in the U.K. in its second weekend .
It expanded to Germany the following weekend and continued its roll out in Australia , Mexico , Brazil and Korea throughout September , and finally Japan on December 23 , 2016 .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gives the film an approval rating of 88 % , based on 217 reviews , with an average rating of 7.3/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , "
Pete 's Dragon continues Disney 's current live - action winning streak with an update that gives the original a visual overhaul without overwhelming its sweet , soulful charm . "
On Metacritic , the film has a score of 71 out of 100 , based on 42 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A " .
The movie was given three - and - a - half out of four stars in The New York Post by Kyle Smith who called it , " A cinematic enchantment " as well as , " one of the year 's best movies . "
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film 3 out of 4 stars and wrote , " Thanks to director David Lowery 's humanizing magic , this tale of an orphan boy and a dragon is that rare family film you really can take to heart . "
Nancy Churnin of The Dallas Morning News gave the film a " B+ " and said that while the remake , " may owe more to E.T. the Extra - Terrestrial , along with a dash of The Jungle Book than it does to the original Pete 's Dragon , " she overall concluded that " this story of two vulnerable souls who help each other find their way works , too . "
Barry Hertz of The Globe and Mail praised the film for its sincerity as well as its " honest effort to entertain and enthrall " audiences rather than simply being a cash grab .
Glenn Kenny of The New York Times felt mixed about the film in his review saying , " It is slightly unfair to say that this reboot of Pete 's Dragon is middling on a larger scale , but it 's not entirely inaccurate either . "
Michael O'Sullivan of The Washington Post gave the film two out of four stars and wrote , " While Pete 's Dragon does a fine job of evoking the delight one might feel at flying over hill and dale on the back of a mythological creature , it is less successful in rendering real human emotion . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Award !
Date of Ceremony !
Category !
Recipient(s ) !
Result ! Ref(s )
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Pete 's Dragon was released on Blu - ray , DVD and digital download on November 29 , 2016 .
The film topped the home video sales charts for the week ending on December 4 , 2016 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Disney 's Pete 's Dragon film locations and information from " The Home of Disney 's Pete 's Dragon " - New Zealand .