CROUCHING TIGER , HIDDEN DRAGON :
SWORD OF DESTINY Crouching Tiger , Hidden Dragon : Sword of Destiny ( ) is a 2016 American - Chinese martial arts film directed by Yuen Woo - ping and written by John Fusco , based on the novel Iron Knight , Silver Vase by Wang Dulu .
It is also a sequel to the 2000 film Crouching Tiger , Hidden Dragon .
The film stars Donnie Yen , Michelle Yeoh , Harry Shum , Jr. , Jason Scott Lee , Roger Yuan , Woon Young Park , Eugenia Yuan , JuJu Chan , Chris Pang , Veronica Ngo , Shuya Chang and Natasha Liu Bordizzo .
The film was released in Hong Kong on February 18 , in China on February 19 and worldwide on Netflix outside China on February 26 , 2016 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
After eighteen years of solitude , renowned warrior - maiden Shu Lien emerges from retirement and travels to Peking , where the Green Destiny — the legendary sword of her deceased love Li Mu Bai — is located .
In the forest , Shu Lien 's carriage is attacked by several warriors from the West Lotus clan .
As she fights them , a masked horseman comes to her aid , and together they defeat the attackers , revealing one 's identity to be a young man called Wei Fang .
At the tower of the West Lotus warlord Hades Dai , a young woman named Snow Vase arrives asking to join his ranks .
As Dai approaches , she draws a sword and attempts to kill him , although he easily fights her off , and she flees .
As Wei Fang makes his way through the forest , he is approached by a blind enchantress , who orders him to take her to Dai .
She tells Dai that his great sword is surpassed by the Green Destiny , and prophesies that if he is to rule the Martial World , he must obtain the sword .
Dai is reluctant to storm the home of the emperor 's brother , but the enchantress tells him to send Wei Fang , as the boy and the sword are bound by destiny itself .
Shu Lien arrives in Peking , and is taken to the house of Sir Te , a man like a father to her , who has recently died .
Te 's son greets her and reveals that the Green Destiny is kept on display at the house , also recalling the unmentioned love between Li Mu Bai and Shu Lien .
That night as Wei Fang breaks into the house and attempts to steal the sword , Snow Vase appears and fights him .
During the fight , Snow Vase sees a birthmark on Wei Fang 's chest , which distracts her and allows him to escape .
She calls for help and Shu Lien arrives and captures the boy .
Snow Vase approaches Shu Lien and asks her to train her in the Iron Way .
At a tavern , Meng Sizhao ( known as Silent Wolf in the West ) , the horseman who came to Shu Lien 's aid , posts a warrant for warriors to join him protecting the House of Te .
One warrior offers his twenty swordsmen for a high price , and attacks when rebuffed .
Four warriors join Silent Wolf in the fight , and he recruits them to his cause :
Flying Blade of Shantung ; Thunder Fist Chan , famed in Zhejiang ; Silver Dart Shi , famed in Fuzhou ; and Turtle Ma , famed in that tavern .
Shu Lien begins Snow Vase 's training .
That night , Silent Wolf and his warriors arrive at the Te compound .
Shu Lien is shocked to see Silent Wolf , her former betrothed , as he was thought to have been killed by Hades Dai many years before .
He explains that he was in love with Shu Lien , but knew that Mu Bai was her true love , and had feigned his demise to seek a life of enlightenment in the mountains , as he knew that as long as he was alive , Li Mu Bai would not have asked Shu Lien for her hand .
Hades Dai rages that Wei Fang has failed in his raid , and sends his elite warrior , Mantis , to retrieve the sword .
She arrives with her raiding party , and Silver Dart Shi and Turtle Ma are killed in the attack .
Snow Vase attempts to free Wei Fang from his cage in the courtyard , but she is attacked by Mantis , and Wei Fang reveals the sword 's location .
The blind enchantress fights Shu Lien in the sword chamber , killing Sir Te 's son when Shu Lien refuses to relinquish the sword .
As the inhabitants of the House of Te mourn the loss of their dearest companions , Snow Vase explains her connection to Wei Fang 's past .
His birth mother was the legendary swordswoman Han Mei .
However , as a baby , he was swapped for the infant Snow Vase by her mother , a concubine .
Han Mei raised Snow Vase as her own daughter , but never stopped looking for her son .
Eventually finding him at West Lotus , she was mortally wounded by Hades Dai and , as she died , implored Snow Vase to find Wei Fang .
Knowing that Dai will send people to kill Wei Fang , Snow Vase frees him , and is horrified to later hear that he has stolen the sword .
Silent Wolf tracks the boy down and they fight on a frozen lake .
Wei Fang 's master , Iron Crow , arrives and wounds Silent Wolf , allowing Wei Fang to escape and reach West Lotus .
Wei Fang offers the sword to Hades Dai , but then attempts to kill him with it to avenge his mother .
Shu Lien and the others arrive and fight Dai 's army .
Shu Lien fights the enchantress and kills her , using her skills to see through the witch 's illusions .
Mantis kills Flying Blade and Thunder Fist , then fights Snow Vase , who defeats her but is badly wounded .
Silent Wolf fights Hades Dai on the tower , eventually killing the warlord with his own sword as he reaches for the Green Destiny .
Snow Vase survives her injuries , and joins Shu Lien , Silent Wolf and Wei Fang as they take the Green Destiny to the Wudang Mountains where it will be kept safe yet again .
CAST
* Donnie Yen as Silent Wolf /
Meng Sizhao * Michelle Yeoh as Yu Shu Lien
* Harry Shum , Jr. as Wei - Fang * Natasha Liu Bordizzo as Snow Vase * Jason Scott Lee as Hades Dai * Eugenia Yuan as Blind Enchantress * Roger Yuan as Iron Crow * JuJu Chan as Silver Dart Shi
* Chris Pang as Flying Blade * Woon Young Park as Thunder Fist Chan * Darryl Quon as Turtle Ma * Veronica Ngo as Mantis
* Gary Young as Te Junior PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In January 2013 , it was reported that a sequel to the 2000 film Crouching Tiger , Hidden Dragon would begin shooting in May , with Harvey Weinstein producing .
Fight choreography would be by Yuen Woo Ping , The script by John Fusco would be based on the fifth and final book of the Crane - Iron Series , Iron Knight , Silver Vase .
On March 18 , 2013 , actor Donnie Yen confirmed rumors that he had been offered a role in the new film .
Around the same time , there were also conflicting reports on whether Michelle Yeoh had been asked to reprise her role of Yu Shu Lien .
On May 16 , 2013 , it was officially announced that the sequel had been approved by the studio .
Initially titled Iron Knight , Silver Vase ( the same title as its source material ) , the film was then re - titled Crouching Tiger , Hidden Dragon : The Green Legend .
Donnie Yen was confirmed to star as Silent Wolf while Michelle Yeoh was confirmed to be reprising her role as Yu Shu Lien .
On August 20 , 2013 , it was reported that Zhang Ziyi was in talks to reprise her role as Jen Yu , but Zhang 's agent Ji Lingling told the media that that was not true and stated , " Zhang would reprise her role only if the director was Ang Lee " .
On June 16 , 2014 , it was announced that the film would be co - produced by Pegasus Media , China Film Group Corporation , and The Weinstein Company , with a release date in 2016 .
On July 30 , 2014 , actor Harry Shum , Jr. was cast in the role of Wei - Fang .
While it was initially announced that production on the film would begin in June 2014 with location shooting in New Zealand and China , shooting was later bumped to August 2014 .
In September 2014 , Variety reported that principal photography was underway in New Zealand .
The leaked order from the State Administration of Press , Publication , Radio , Film , and Television ( SAPPRFT ) Department of Film Management revealed the film 's production was approved with amendments , including replacing White Lotus Society with a fictitious martial arts faction , downplaying " Oppose the Qing , Restore the Ming " content , controlling the amount of gore and violence , and amending Yu Xiulian 's line " A superior army breaks its enemy without fighting , " to " The army which breaks its enemy without fighting is the superior one . "
The film was shot in English and dubbed to Mandarin , unlike its predecessor which was the other way around .
RELEASE Section::::Release .
On September 29 , 2014 , it was announced that Netflix and The Weinstein Company 's Harvey Weinstein had made a deal to release the feature film Crouching Tiger , Hidden Dragon II :
The Green Legend on Netflix .
The sequel would be released via RADiUS - TWC simultaneously on Netflix and in selected IMAX theatres on August 28 , 2015 .
The day after Netflix 's announcement , American cinema chain Regal Entertainment Group announced that they would not show the film in their theaters .
Regal 's Russ Nunley declined to be part of " an experiment where you can see the same product on screens varying from three stories tall to 3 inches wide on a smart phone " , as opposed to a regular theater experience .
The same day , AMC , Carmike Cinemas , Cinemark Theatres , and Cineworld also announced they would not show the film .
IMAX 's CEO Richard Gelfond argued on the rejection by some chains , saying , " This is a test , and I ca n't tell you for sure that it 's going to work , but I can tell you for sure that attempting to innovate is a good idea because as technology changes , viewers change , and we have to figure out what does or does n't work " .
On July 7 , 2015 , the film was removed from the August 28 , 2015 slot and was moved back to a fourth - quarter day and date release .
A trailer for the film was released on December 7 , 2015 .
The film was scheduled to be released in China on February 8 , 2016 , but was pushed back to February 19 .
The film was released worldwide outside China on Netflix and in 10–15 IMAX screens in the United States on February 26 , 2016 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The film grossed on its opening weekend in China .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a rating of 19 % , based on 32 reviews , with an average rating of 5.1/10 .
On Metacritic , the film has a score of 47 out of 100 , based on 13 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
NOVEL Section::::Novel .
In March 2015 , Weinstein Books announced that a film tie - in novel had been written by Justin Hill .
The novel was released on January 26 , 2016 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS