MAT FRANCO Mat Franco ( born May 10 , 1988 ) is an American magician and the winner of the ninth season of America 's Got Talent .
Franco rose above hundreds of thousands of acts to become the first magician in history to win , including the $ 1 million prize .
Best known for his personality - driven , sleight - of - hand style of magic , Mat Franco 's TV specials marked the first time NBC produced a spin - off show around their AGT winner .
Franco is currently headlining in at The LINQ Hotel and Casino at the Mat Franco Theater in Las Vegas .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
Franco was born in Johnston , Rhode Island .
After he saw magic on TV when he was four , he begged his parents to get him a magic set .
He then began performing tricks in his kindergarten class .
One of his greatest influences and the first assistant was his grandmother , who used to read magic instructions to Mat when he was too young to read for himself .
One of Mat 's favorite memories is when he and his grandmother tried to figure out a way to make cards appear out of thin air , like a magician they had seen on television .
They hung a black curtain in the living room and cut a hole in it .
Mat 's grandmother hid on the other side and passed cards through the curtain to Mat while his grandfather watched , playing along with that " grandma must have stepped outside for a minute " and that he had no idea how the cards were appearing .
Franco continued studying magic as a child and performed any chance he could .
When he was 12 , he had saved enough money from local shows to fly to Las Vegas to study performance art with some of his idols , including Jeff McBride .
Franco graduated from Johnston High School in 2006 and was captain of the wrestling team his senior year .
He would go on to study at the University of Rhode Island , receiving a degree in Business Administration with a minor in Communication Studies .
EARLY CAREER
Section::::Early career .
In 2003 , at age 15 , Franco was invited to perform onstage at the Riviera Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas , as part of a show hosted by the Society of American Magicians called " Stars of Tomorrow " .
After graduating from college in 2010 , Franco performed his one - man show on college campuses throughout the U.S. , touring six months out of the year , for four years .
He was nominated for " Fastest Rising Star " in 2012 , and in 2013 was awarded " Best College Performer " by Campus Activities Magazine ( based in Prosperity , South Carolina ) in their Reader 's Choice Awards .
Franco was always encouraged by his grandmother , Eleanor Campellone , who told an interviewer , " His mother was always working and he could n't show her everything --
look mom , look mom .
So the grandma was there
and I had all the time in the world .
I 'd spend hours watching his tricks . "
AMERICA 'S GOT TALENT
Section::::America 's Got Talent .
In 2014/2015 , Franco achieved mainstream success as the winner of America 's Got Talent .
AGT APPEARANCES
* June 17 , 2014 : Audition –
In Los Angeles , during Episode 904 , Franco used card manipulation to impress the judges , Howard Stern , Heidi Klum , Mel B and Howie Mandel .
With a shuffled deck of cards he told a story that he wrote about America 's Got Talent .
( The audition was recorded in April in the Dolby Theater in Los Angeles . )
And got a standing ovation .
* July 22 , 2014 :
Judgment Week –
In Episode 907 , Franco performed a visual interactive card trick where he painted a picture of Howie Mandel on the Judges ' desk , using just a deck of cards .
This performance earned four Yes votes again .
* August 5 , 2014 :
Quarterfinals – Franco appeared in Episode 911 and used Heidi Klum as his assistant .
His tricks with fire and with disappearing and reappearing cards earned him four Yes votes and standing ovations .
* August 6 , 2014 : Quarterfinals –
In Episode 912 in New York , Franco was one among five acts to proceed to the Semifinals .
* September 2 , 2014 : Semifinals – In Episode 919 , Franco was one of twelve acts competing for six opportunities in the Top 12 Finals .
After having Howie , Howard , and Heidi choose three random cards ( 6 , 4 , and 2 ) , he borrowed Mel B 's phone ; dropped it into liquid ; vanished the phone using a hair dryer ; and then moved into the middle of the audience at Radio City Music Hall to cut open seat # 642 , revealing Mel 's phone inside the seat cushion .
* September 3 , 2014 : Semifinals – In episode 920 , Franco was Voted through to the Top 12 .
* September 9 , 2014 :
Top 12 –
In episode 921 , Franco performed an interactive trick with the live audience , including the judges , and even the home viewers .
He had everyone at home select a card , and using cannon , was able to get the selected card stuck to the ceiling at Radio City Music Hall .
* September 10 , 2014 :
Top 12 Results – in episode 922 , Franco was voted through to the Finals , and was declared the last magician standing in the competition .
* September 16 , 2014 : Finals – In the finale , each performer had to do a reprise of a previous performance .
Franco chose to do a twist on his audition , by doing a version of Cups and Balls , accompanied by another story that he wrote about the judges .
Later on in the episode , Franco performed a large scale trick which included a " human deck " of cards , which consisted of 52 random audience members that Nick Cannon chose , and brought on stage .
* September 17 , 2014 :
Finals Results –
Franco appeared as one of six finalists at Radio City Music Hall in New York City .
The show , in which Franco used Rosie O'Donnell and Howard Stern as assistants , aired on television on September 17 .
Section::::AGT appearances .
At the conclusion of the finale , Franco was announced as the winner .
He continues to return In specials of following seasons of Americas Got Talent such a s a Christmas special in 2016 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The Las Vegas Review - Journal wrote of Franco 's stint on America 's Got Talent : " Franco did a crafty job of customizing his prediction - based , sleight - of - hand magic to make maximum use of Talent judges Howard Stern and Mel B.
And he displayed a personality and sense of humor that other magicians were not able to convey in their limited camera time . "
It 's been said that Franco " specializes in creating customized , interactive presentations for his audiences that allow for spontaneity and improvisation .
For Mat , magic is n't about ' tricking ' or ' fooling ' the audience ; it 's about connecting with people and bringing smiles to their faces . "
CAREER
Section::::Career .
Franco began headlining in Las Vegas at LINQ Hotel & Casino on August 5 , 2015 .
The show is titled " Mat Franco :
Magic Reinvented Nightly " .
By 2016 the show was named " Best Magic Show in Las Vegas " by the Las Vegas Review Journal .
Franco returned to Radio City Music Hall as the featured guest performer on America 's Got Talent for the first live broadcast of the show 's tenth season ( August 12 , 2015 ) .
He later returned for the season finale .
Franco starred in his own two - hour magic TV special titled Mat Franco 's Got Magic that aired on NBC on September 17 , and December 9 , 2015 .
Franco started to actively post his tricks on his YouTube channel in April 2015 .
He currently has over 200,000 subscribers to his channel .
In 2016 , his Vegas show was awarded " Best Show " on the Las Vegas Strip in the " Las Vegas Weekly Readers ' Choice Awards " .
In February 2017 , Mat Franco returned to his alma mater University of Rhode Island for a show celebrating the university 's 125th anniversary .
On July 10th 2017 , the LINQ officially renamed the theater the " Mat Franco Theater " and the city of Las Vegas presented Franco with a key to the Las Vegas Strip and declared July 10th officially " Mat Franco Day . "
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website
* Official NBC biography
* MagicNewswire.com interview with Dodd Vickers