ODD SQUAD ( TV SERIES )
Odd Squad is a Canadian / American children 's live action educational television series that premiered on TVOKids in Canada and PBS Kids in the United States on November 26 , 2014 .
The series was created by Tim McKeon and Adam Peltzman and is co - produced by Fred Rogers Productions and Sinking Ship Entertainment in association with TVOKids and Ici Radio - Canada Télé .
The series features child actors ( whose characters are the employees of the " Odd Squad " ) who use indirect reasoning and basic math to solve and investigate strange happenings in their town .
The series is a general satire of the police procedural and spy fiction genres and uses humor to teach the audience basic math skills and math - related topics .
In the UK , the series airs on CBBC .
In Latin America , it airs on Discovery Kids .
Season 3 of the series has been announced .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The series follows the exploits of Odd Squad , an organization run entirely by children , that solves peculiar problems using math skills .
In particular , it typically features two employees of the organization 's investigation division that work in precinct 13579 of the organization — Agents Olive ( Dalila Bela ) and Otto ( Filip Geljo ) in the 1st season , and Olympia ( Anna Cathcart ) and Otis ( Issac Kragten ) in the second season .
Selected episodes feature other types of employees of the fictional organization , like security officers , so - called " tube operators " , and scientists .
The names of the employees , with one exception , always start with the letter O. Agents are typically assigned cases by their boss , Ms. O ( Millie Davis ) , and travel via a system of interconnected tubes to get to their destinations .
They deduce the solution to the problem or how to detain the perpetrator by using basic mathematical principles that are typically the focus of the episode .
Often , they can not solve the problem at the scene and must go back to their precinct 's headquarters or to the " Mathroom " ( T.J. McGibbon ) , a sentient space that communicates through large paper fortune tellers and can unfold them to display information to help the agents see connections and better solve their case .
Along with math , agents also use " gadgets " designed by the scientists ; in the first season , Agent Oscar ( Sean Michael Kyer ) heads the lab , gaining an assistant , Agent Oona ( Olivia Presti ) , in early season two who eventually takes over the lab .
The characters also have to deal with a variety of recurring villains who often put a mathematical spin on their plots .
The seal of the Odd Squad headquarters depicts a jackalope carrying a shield in front of it ( bearing an image of the seal — an instance of the Droste effect ) and bananas at each side of it .
CHARACTERS MAIN * Agent Olive ( Dalila Bela , season 1 ) :
Referred to as a longtime employee of the Odd Squad , Olive began season 1 of the series adapting to working with and training her new partner , Otto .
Olive is usually calm , brisk , and serious .
She has a morbid fear of pies , which she acquired after saving her organization 's building from a pie - related disaster instigated by her previous partner , a very gifted agent named Todd who was fired from the organization for misconduct and went on to pursue villainy .
In the season 1 finale , Olive departs the series along with her partner , Otto , to run a different Odd Squad precinct as Ms. O. * Agent Otto ( Filip Geljo , season 1 ) : Olive 's partner , and in the first episode the newest employee of the organization .
In contrast to his partner 's more serious demeanor and personality , he is a more lenient , laid - back employee .
Despite his lack of experience with his job , Otto frequently uncovers the facts needed to solve the case at hand , even doing so in the absence of his more experienced partner , proving his worth as an agent .
In the season 1 finale , Otto departs the series to run another Odd Squad office as Mr. O with his partner , Olive .
* Ms. O / Oprah ( Millie Davis , seasons 1 – ) : " Ms. O " is the title of any female head of an Odd Squad division , but in - show , the title most often refers to the head of the division featured on the show .
Ms. O is a very strict boss .
She has the tendency to yell ( a habit seen less frequently as the series progresses ) and is often seen sipping a juice box .
Despite appearing younger than most of the agents , Ms. O has worked for Odd Squad for several decades ; her actual age remains a mystery .
In - show , it is revealed that her actual name is " Oprah " .
* Agent Oscar ( Sean Michael Kyer , seasons 1–2 ) :
Oscar was the precinct 's head scientist , in charge of the precinct 's laboratory .
Other employees go to him for technical solutions to their problems .
Oscar is depicted as being very intelligent and having a quirky and goofy personality .
He departed from the series in the Season 2 episode " Oscar Strikes Back " , where he became the president of the organization 's science division after the former president was dismissed for misconduct .
* Agent Olympia ( Anna Cathcart , season 2 ) : A new agent , introduced in the first episode of season 2 , who joins the series to fill in the opening left by the departure of Olive in the season 1 finale .
She was given early graduation from the organization 's training Academy because Ms. O wanted her in the equivalent of Otto 's position .
She is depicted as being very social and outgoing , and having a generally happy and carefree personality .
* Agent Otis ( Isaac Kragten , season 2 ) : A new agent , introduced at the start of season 2 , who joins to fill the opening left by the departure of Otto in the season 1 finale .
Unlike his partner , he has a more serious and socially - reserved personality .
There are no records of him attending the organization 's " Academy " , but he is depicted as being the more seasoned member of the new team .
Possibly as part of his more socially - reserved demeanor , he has several unusual dislikes ; initially he had a dislike of chewing gum , and once he refused a pizza party offered to him as a reward for his productivity , claiming to not like the ingredients of a pizza .
* Agent Oona ( Olivia Presti , season 2 ) :
The precinct 's head scientist who is in charge of the laboratory , taking the role from Oscar after his departure from the series in the Season 2 episode " Oscar Strikes Back " .
Like her predecessor , she is depicted as having a quirky personality .
RECURRING
ODD SQUAD
EMPLOYEES
*
Dr. O ( Peyton Kennedy , seasons 1–2 , and Kaden Stephen , season 2 ) : The precinct 's resident medical employee , who assists others with medical - related problems .
She is known for her eccentric behavior and frequently says things that make no sense , whilst frequently reminding the agents
" I 'm a doctor ! "
in a manner reminiscent of Star Treks Dr. McCoy .
It is revealed in - show that she was once a worker in the Odd Squad gift shop , but became a doctor when the gift shop was shut down so the space could be used for a laboratory .
After the original Dr. O leaves to work as a doctor in space , she is replaced with a new male doctor who previously worked in another department .
* Agent Obfusco ( Jaeden J. Noel , season 1 ) : An Odd Squad agent and cross - cultural expert who speaks in obscure riddles .
He is difficult for the other agents to understand , and has a generally extremely peculiar and eccentric demeanor , which leads the other employees to try and avoid working with him .
He has a sister named Obfuscolina who is even more eccentric than he is , to the point where he can not understand anything she says and considers himself " normal " when compared to her .
* Agent Ocean ( Elijah Sandiford , season 2 ) :
The precinct 's director of the ' Creature Room ' , which houses many bizarre " creatures " and plants which Odd Squad agents may need to know about .
Ocean has a laid - back and easy - going personality .
* Agent Octavia ( Julia Lalonde , season 1 ) :
Agent Oz 's partner .
It was noted in an episode that she is one of the precinct 's best employees .
She is usually looking for her partner because he is invisible .
* Oksana ( Madeleine Barbeau , seasons 1 – ) : The precinct 's resident cook , in charge of providing the employees with food .
In the show it is mentioned that she has to prepare all the meals by herself .
She has a deadpan and sarcastic personality .
* Agent Olaf ( Eshaan Buadwal , seasons 1 – ) :
Agent Oren 's partner .
Olaf is happy - go - lucky and jovial in nature but tends to be very simple - minded .
Despite this , he has shown to have moments of intelligence , often to the shock and amazement of his fellow agents .
He shares Oren 's penchant for laziness .
He dreams of becoming a dentist and fears not becoming one .
He has an unusual obsession with potatoes .
Later on in the series it is revealed that he is a werewolf .
* Agent Orchid ( Michela Luci , seasons 1 – ) : One of the younger agents .
She tends to be extremely stubborn .
* Agent Oren ( Brendan Heard , seasons 1 – ) :
Agent Olaf 's partner .
Oren is depicted as snarky and arrogant .
Oren and his partner have an ongoing rivalry with Olive and Otto .
Oren has an unusual fear of pancakes and dreams of becoming an Odd Squad director and running his own precinct .
* Agent Owen ( Christian Distefano , seasons 1 – ) : The head of the precinct 's Security department ( the department in charge of defending against intruders , checking the precinct 's assigned city / town for " oddness " , and making sure the more dangerous " creatures " do not escape their containment ) .
* Agent Orson ( Nashton Avila , Nathan Avila .
seasons
1- ) : one of the baby agents .
Seen answering the phone in a public service announcement ; an excellent driver ( Undercover Olive - season 1 ) ; perpetual winner of the Agent of the Month Award , until Otis discovered him masquerading as the records clerk Opa ( Taylor Thorn ) , and his twin disguised as Ms O ; Was a cry baby when he lost the award .
* Agent Ozlyn ( Arista Arhin , season 2 ) : Worker in the Security Department .
* Agent Olly ( Sasha Steiner , season 2 ) : A former doctor who now assists Oksana with maintaining the building 's break room and cafeteria .
* Agent Xavier ( Leonidas Castrounis , season 2 ) from Odd Squad 's Department X Special Task Force who oversee the agency 's work , enforce rules ( similar to Internal Affairs ) and have the power to temporarily shut Odd Squad down .
* Agent Xena ( Sheena Darnley , season 2 )
Agent Xavier 's partner .
OTHERS
* Delivery Debbie ( Ashley Botting ) : A female pizzeria owner who has appeared in numerous episodes and played a key part in the series movie , Odd Squad : The Movie ( 2016 ) .
Her arch rival is Delivery Doug who specializes in the sale of egg - salad sandwiches .
* Polly Graph ( Ava Preston ) : A girl who runs a stand selling hot chocolate or lemonade , depending on the season , outside her house .
Employees of the local ' Odd Squad ' precinct frequently patronize her stand .
She is very fond of graphs and has just the right visual representation to deal with the situation at hand .
While she is not an agent , she offers data of all sorts to employees who visit her stand .
Ms. O has asked her to come in to assist on cases and internal business within the organization on occasion .
* Soundcheck ( Lucas Meeuse , Matthew Armet , Thomas Alderson , Stephan Dickson ) : A fictitious and satirical boy band made up of Tony D. , Danny T. , Ringo , and Johnny J. , and is well liked by all the precinct employees with the exception of Agent Olive , who later admits to liking them in Odd Squad : The Movie ( 2016 ) .
Songs by the group include Take Away Four , The Force of Gravity and Up , Down , Left ,
Right .
Sound Check as a group appears on the album Odd Squad : Stop the Music .
* Rivka ( Meghan Allen ) : The caretaker for the unseen Baby Genius .
Agents meet with them in a dark alley , and have to give gifts that amuse Baby Genius , to get their help .
VILLAINS
* Fladam ( Martin Roach , seasons 1 – ) : A villain with glasses capable of transforming anything into a two - dimensional form .
* Noisemaker ( David Tompa , seasons 1 – ) : A villain who wants to fill the world with odd noises .
He wears a variety of instruments all over his body that make sounds whenever he moves .
*
Odd Todd ( Joshua Kilimnik , seasons 1 – ) : Previously an employee of the organization , Todd was fired for misconduct and began to pursue villainy , taking the name of ' Odd Todd ' .
A recurring villain in the first season , he was outsmarted by Agent Otto and renounced villainy for other interests .
In the second season , he has taken up gardening and has been seen providing assistance to the precinct 's employees ; he briefly returns as a villain in an alternate timeline in " World Turned Odd " .
Early in the first season before Todd was introduced , a running gag was in place where characters would comment about Otto being " so much better than Olive 's last partner " ; upon Otto 's asking about who was her last partner , they would change the subject .
Another running gag in place was that the number 43—his badge number — was hidden in various places for viewers to find .
* Puppetmaster ( Stacey McGunnigle , season 1 ) : A villainess who not only turns people into Muppet - based puppets , but also plays with sock puppets she presumably makes .
She has long hair styled in an updo .
* Shapeshifter ( Laura Landauer , seasons 1 – ) :
A villain who can transform anything or anyone , including herself , into a different object or person ( Examples :
In one episode she transforms a briefcase into a pie ; in the same episode she also took the form of another character ) but the resulting object or person weighs the same as the object / person they were before .
A younger version of Shapeshifter is seen in the movie produced to accompany the series , "
Odd Squad :
The Movie " ( 2016 ) .
* Tiny Dancer ( Danielle Benton , seasons 1 – ) : A villain that makes inanimate objects dance on command .
EPISODE LIST AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Recipients !
Result rowspan=112015 rowspan=1Banff World Media Festival
Best Show - Pre - School Category Sinking Ship Entertainment rowspan=6Daytime Emmy Award Outstanding Children 's Series
Sinking Ship Entertainment Outstanding Writing in a Children 's or Pre - School Children 's Series Tim McKeon , Alexandra Fox , Rachel Lewis , Adam Peltzman , Mark DeAngelis
Outstanding Single Camera Editing Jennifer Essex - Chew , Courtney Goldman , Sinking
Ship Entertainment Outstanding Sound Editing –
Live Action
P. Jason MacNeil , James Robinson , Earl Torno , Bill Turchinetz , John D. Smith , Dave Yonson , Virginia Storey , Sinking Ship Entertainment Outstanding Directing in a Children 's or Pre - School Children 's Series
J.J. Johnson Sinking Ship Entertainment Outstanding Hairstyling Patricia Cuthbert rowspan=1Kidscreen Kids :
Best Non - Animated or Mixed Series
Sinking Ship Entertainment rowspan=1Parents ' Choice Award Parents ' Choice Gold Honor
Sinking Ship Entertainment rowspan=2Youth Media Alliance Award of Excellence , Best Convergent Website Sinking Ship Entertainment Award of Excellence for Best Television Program , All Genres , Ages 6–8 Category
Sinking Ship Entertainment rowspan=152016 rowspan=5Canadian Screen Awardss Best Direction in a Children 's or Youth Program or Series Craig Wallace , Sinking Ship Entertainment
Best Writing in a Children 's or Youth Program or Series Tim McKeon ,
Sinking Ship Entertainment Best Picture Editing in a Variety or Sketch Comedy Program or Series
Sinking Ship Entertainment Best Performance in a Children 's or Youth Series Delila Bela Best Pre - School Program or Series Sinking Ship Entertainment rowspan=9Daytime Emmy Award
Outstanding Children 's Series Paul Siefken , J.J. Johnson , Tim McKeon , Blair Powers , Adam Peltzman , Emily Helfgot , Matthew J.R. Bishop , Mark De Angelis , Georgina Lopez , Sinking Ship Entertainment Interactive Media – Enhancement to Daytime Series Blair Powers , Paul Siefken , Gavin Friesen , Ronald Ruslim , Dave Peth , Sinking
Ship Entertainment Outstanding Stunt Coordination Regan Moore Outstanding Performer in a Children 's Series or Pre - School Series - Oscar Sean Michael Kyer Outstanding Sound Editing - Live Action John Douglas Smith , P. Jason MacNeil , Bill Turchinetz , Dave Yonson , Virginia Storey
Sinking Ship Entertainment
Outstanding Writing in a Children 's or Pre - School Children 's Series Tim McKeon , Charles Johnston , Mark De Angelis Outstanding Directing in a Children 's or Pre - School Children 's Series J.J. Johnson , Stephen Reynolds , Brian K. Roberts , Stefan Scaini , Craig David Wallace , Sinking
Ship Entertainment Outstanding Costume Design
Christine Toye , Sinking
Ship Entertainment Outstanding Hairstyling Patricia Cuthbert rowspan=1Parents ' Choice Award Parents ' Choice Gold Honor
Sinking Ship Entertainment rowspan=202017 rowspan=8Canadian Screen Awards Best Performance by an Actress in a Leading Role in a Dramatic Program or Limited Series Millie Davis Best Direction in a Children 's or Youth Program or Series
J.J. Johnson Best Direction in a Children 's or Youth Program or Series Stefan Scaini Best Original Music Score for a
Program
Paul Buckley
Best Performance in a Children 's or Youth Program Sean Michael Kyer Best TV Movie or Limited Series Odd Squad :
The Movie Sinking Ship Entertainment Best Writing in a Children 's or Youth Series Tim McKeon , Adam Peltzman , Mark DeAngelis Best Children 's or Youth Fiction Program or Series Sinking
Ship Entertainment rowspan=9Daytime Emmy Awards
Outstanding Children 's or Family Viewing Series J.J. Johnson , Tim McKeon , Blair Powers , Paul Siefken , Matthew J.R. Bishop , Georgina Lopez , Stephen J. Turnbull Outstanding Interactive - Enhancement to Daytime Program or Series Ellen Doherty , Tim McKeon , Adam Peltzman , Blair Powers , Gavin Friesen , Ronald Ruslim , Stephen J. Turnbull , Dave Peth , Anna Cathcart
Outstanding Writing in a Children 's or Pre - School Children 's Series Tim McKeon , Amy Benham , Charles Johnston , Adam Peltzman , Mark De Angelis , Robby Hoffman Outstanding Directing in a Children 's or Pre - School Children 's Series J.J. Johnson , Stephen Reynolds , Stefan Scaini ,
Warren P. Sonoda
Outstanding Single Camera Editing Jennifer Essex - Chew , Courtney Goldman , Christopher Minns
Outstanding Perfomer Issak Kragten Outstanding Costume Design
Christine Toye Outstanding Hairstyling Liz Roelands
Outstanding Make - up Jenna Servatius
rowspan=1Kidscreen
Best Non - Animated or Mixed Series - KIDS
PROGRAMING
Sinking Ship Entertainment rowspan=1Parents ' Choice Award Parents ' Choice Gold Honor
Sinking Ship Entertainment rowspan=1Youth Media Alliance
Best Program , Live Action , Ages 6–9 Sinking
Ship Entertainment rowspan=142018 rowspan=5Canadian Screen Awards Best Children 's or Youth Fiction Program or Series Sinking Ship Entertainment Best Direction ,
Children 's or Youth J.J. Johnson Best Writing , Children 's or Youth Tim McKeon , Adam Peltzman Best Performance , Children 's or Youth Anna Cathcart Best Cross - Platform Project Odd Squad 1.5 rowspan=1Kidscreen
Best Non - Animated or Mixed Series - KIDS PROGRAMING
Sinking Ship Entertainment rowspan=8Daytime Emmy Awards Outstanding Children 's or Family Viewing Series J.J. Johnson , Tim McKeon , Blair Powers , Paul Siefken , Ellen Doherty , Matthew J.R. Bishop , Adam Peltzman , Mark De Angelis , Stephen J. Turnbull , Sinking Ship Entertainment Outstanding Writing in a Children 's , Preschool Children 's , Family Viewing Tim McKeon , Adam Peltzman , Mark De Angelis , Robby Hoffman Outstanding Directing in a Children 's , Preschool Children 's or Family
Viewing Program J.J. Johnson , Stephen Reynolds , Warren P. Sonoda , Sinking Ship Entertainment Outstanding Art Direction / Set Decoration / Scenic Design Ron Stefaniuk , Diana Magnus , Amanda Vernuccio , Danielle Dobbyn , Jennifer Bryson , Sinking Ship Entertainment Outstanding Lighting Direction George Lajtai , C.S.C , Sinking
Ship Entertainment Outstanding Sound Mixing Igor Bezuglov , Andrew McDonnell , John Bradshaw , Sean Karp , Sinking Ship Entertainment Outstanding Costume
Design / Styling Christine Toye Outstanding Hairstyling Liz Roelands REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* PBS Kids Home Page * Odd Squad on TVO Kids
* Organisation Super Insolite on Ici Radio - Canada Télé