EVERYBODY WANTS SOME ! !
( FILM )
Everybody Wants Some ! !
is a 2016 American comedy film , written and directed by Richard Linklater , about college baseball players in Texas in 1980 .
The film stars Will Brittain , Zoey Deutch , Ryan Guzman , Tyler Hoechlin , Blake Jenner , Glen Powell , and Wyatt Russell .
It had its world premiere at South by Southwest on March 11 , 2016 , and was theatrically released in the United States on March 30 , 2016 , by Paramount Pictures .
The film grossed $ 4.6 million against a $ 10 million budget but was critically acclaimed .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In Texas in the fall of 1980 , college freshman Jake Bradford , a hotshot pitcher in high school , moves into an off - campus house with other members of the college baseball team .
He meets several teammates , including his roommate Billy , who has been nicknamed " Beuter " because of his Deep Southern accent .
He joins Finnegan , Roper , Dale , and Plummer cruising the campus by car , looking for women .
Upperclassmen Roper , an unapologetic hound dog , and Finnegan , adopting a false feminist tone , both " strike out " with two attractive young women , but one of them , Beverly , says she likes Jake ( " the quiet guy in the back seat " ) ; he makes a note of her room number .
At a team meeting in the house , the coach introduces the new players , who include freshmen Jake , Plummer , Beuter , and Brumley , and transfer students Jay , recruited for his professional - level pitching , and Willoughby , a bearded philosopher - stoner .
The coach cites two rules : no alcohol in the house , and no women upstairs .
The team quickly disregards the rules and hosts a drunken party during which several team members take women up to their bedrooms .
Jake tries to bring a girl into a downstairs room set aside for sex , but it 's occupied , and Beuter refuses to leave their room .
The next morning , Beuter leaves temporarily for home , concerned that his girlfriend is pregnant .
The next day , the team goes out drinking and " cruising chicks " together .
They begin the night at a local disco .
Finnegan patters about his " average dick " , impressing women with his lack of ego .
Jay makes arrogant , racist remarks to a bartender , provoking a brawl .
The team is ejected from the disco .
Jay goes home , and the rest of the team changes their clothes and heads to a western - themed bar to end their night on a high note .
The next day Willoughby shares his marijuana , music , and philosophy with the freshmen , professing his love for Pink Floyd and his extreme distaste for Van Halen .
That afternoon , Jake happens upon Justin , a high school teammate who has embraced punk subculture .
He invites the team to a punk concert , and with Jake 's encouragement they go , briefly putting on yet another identity .
Jake leaves flowers and a note on Beverly 's apartment door that night , then attends a massive frat party at their house .
The next morning , Beverly calls him and they agree to meet .
She says she 's a performing arts major ; Jake answers only that he 's a baseball player , based on advice Finnegan
gave him .
At the team 's first unofficial practice session , Jay upsets his teammates by pitching aggressively .
McReynolds , the team 's captain and best player , puts Jay in his place when he hits a home run off of him .
The coach unexpectedly shows up and calls Willoughby off the pitcher 's mound .
It is later revealed that Willoughby is 30 years old and has been fraudulently transferring to new colleges so he can continue playing ball and enjoying the student lifestyle .
Beverly invites Jake to " Oz " , a costume party thrown by performing - arts students every fall .
Jake mentions the party to his teammates and tries to tell them they would n't enjoy it , but they cajole him into taking them .
Although they initially do n't fit in with the atmosphere and activities , they do their best to hit on the women there and eventually warm up to their surroundings .
Finnegan is ridiculed by his friends for pretending to be into astrology , and Jake takes part in an improvised Alice in Wonderland – themed take on The Dating Game .
Jake and Beverly spend the rest of the night together .
The next morning , the semester begins and Jake and Beverly walk to class together .
Two teammates razz Jake for not returning home that night .
He runs into Plummer in his classroom , and they settle in for their first lecture .
Their history professor enters and writes " Frontiers are where you find them " on the chalkboard .
As their first college class officially begins , Jake falls asleep .
CAST
* Blake Jenner as Jake Bradford * Zoey Deutch as Beverly * Glen Powell as Finnegan " Finn " * Tyler Hoechlin as Glen McReynolds * Ryan Guzman as Kenny Roper
* Wyatt Russell as Charlie Willoughby * Temple Baker as Tyrone Plummer
* J. Quinton Johnson as Dale Douglas
* Will Brittain as Billy " Beuter " Autrey * Juston Street as Jay Niles
* Forrest Vickery as Coma * Tanner Kalina as Alex Brumley
* Austin Amelio as Nesbit
* Michael Monsour as Justin * Jonathan Breck as Coach Gordan
* Dora Madison Burge as Val PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Linklater wrote the first draft of the film in mid-2005 , and tried to finance it in 2009 , but could not get production off the ground until Annapurna Pictures became involved .
In August 2014 , Linklater ceased involvement on the Warner Bros. film The Incredible Mr. Limpet , saying that he wanted to concentrate on a university - set , 1980s baseball film under the working title
That 's What I 'm Talking About .
The project is considered a spiritual sequel to Linklater 's 1993 film Dazed and Confused , which was set on the last day of high school in 1976 .
Linklater also considers the film a " spiritual sequel " to Boyhood because " it begins right where Boyhood ends with a guy showing up at college and meeting his new roommates and a girl . "
In September , Linklater offered Jenner , Hoechlin , Russell , and Guzman roles as members of the baseball team the film focuses on .
Hoechlin chose his role over returning to the fifth season of MTV 's series Teen Wolf .
Later in September , Annapurna Pictures became involved as a financial producer of the film , while Paramount Pictures signed on to handle distribution rights .
More cast members were announced , including Deutch , Brittain , and Powell .
Principal photography began on October 13 , 2014 in Austin , Texas .
Filming took place in Weimar , Texas , from October 15 to December 2 .
Other shooting locations included San Marcos , Texas , Bastrop , Texas , Elgin , Texas and San Antonio .
A night shoot involving extras occurred on October 31 , 2014 , for a costume party scene in Taylor , Texas .
SOUNDTRACK RELEASE
Section::::Release .
On July 27 , 2015 , Paramount Pictures set the film for an April 15 , 2016 release in the United States .
In February 2016 , the film was moved up to April 1 , in a limited release .
It was then moved to March 30 .
The film received a limited release across 19 locations in New York City and Los Angeles on March 30 .
Deadline Hollywood said " should the film make $ 20 K per theater that would be great .
If it makes north of a $ 35 K average , that would be fantastic .
" The film 's opening weekend per - screen gross was $ 16,440 ; the final gross was $ 4.6 million — well below the film 's $ 10 million budget .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a rating of 87 percent based on 186 reviews and an average rating of 7.6/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Nostalgic in the best sense , Everybody Wants Some ! !
finds Richard Linklater ambling through the past with a talented cast , a sweetly meandering story , and a killer classic rock soundtrack .
"
On Metacritic , the film has a score of 83 out of 100 based on 50 reviews , indicating " universal acclaim " .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Award !
Date of ceremony !
Category !
Recipient(s ) !
Result ! Ref(s )
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS