STAR WARS :
THE LAST JEDI
Star Wars :
The Last Jedi ( also known as Star Wars : Episode VIII –
The Last Jedi ) is a 2017 American space opera film written and directed by Rian Johnson .
It is the second installment of the Star Wars sequel trilogy and the eighth installment of the main Star Wars film franchise , following ( 2015 ) .
It was produced by Lucasfilm and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures .
The film 's ensemble cast includes Daisy Ridley , John Boyega , Oscar Isaac , Adam Driver , Mark Hamill , Carrie Fisher , Andy Serkis , Lupita Nyong'o , Domhnall Gleeson , Anthony Daniels , Gwendoline Christie , and Frank Oz in returning roles , with Kelly Marie Tran , Laura Dern and Benicio del Toro joining the cast .
It features the first posthumous film performance by Fisher , who died in December 2016 , and the film is dedicated to her memory .
The plot follows Rey as she receives Jedi training from Luke Skywalker , in hopes of turning the tide for the Resistance in the fight against Kylo Ren and the First Order , while General Leia Organa , Finn , and Poe Dameron attempt to escape a First Order attack on the dwindling Resistance fleet .
The Last Jedi is part of a new trilogy of films announced after Disney 's acquisition of Lucasfilm in October 2012 .
It was produced by Lucasfilm President Kathleen Kennedy and Ram Bergman , with Force Awakens director J. J. Abrams as an executive producer .
John Williams , composer for the previous films , returned to compose the score .
A number of scenes were filmed at Skellig Michael in Ireland during pre - production in September 2015 , but principal photography began at Pinewood Studios in the United Kingdom in February 2016 , and ended in July 2016 .
Post - production wrapped in September 2017 .
The Last Jedi had its world premiere in Los Angeles on December 9 , 2017 , and was released in the United States on December 15 , 2017 .
It grossed over $ 1.3billion worldwide , becoming the highest - grossing film of 2017 , the seventh - highest - ever grossing film in North America and the ninth - highest - grossing film of all time during its theatrical run .
It is also the second - highest - grossing film of the Star Wars franchise , and turned a net profit of over $ 417 million .
It was positively received by film critics , who praised the ensemble cast , visual effects , musical score , action sequences and emotional weight .
The film received four nominations at the 90th Academy Awards , including Best Original Score and Best Visual Effects , as well two nominations at the 71st British Academy Film Awards .
A sequel , provisionally titled , is scheduled for release on December 20 , 2019 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Following the battle of Starkiller Base , General Leia Organa leads Resistance forces to flee D'Qar when a First Order fleet arrives .
Poe Dameron leads a costly counterattack that destroys a First Order dreadnought , but after the Resistance escapes to hyperspace , the First Order tracks them and attacks the Resistance convoy .
Kylo Ren , Leia 's son , hesitates to fire on the lead Resistance ship after sensing his mother 's presence , but his wingmen destroy the bridge , killing most of the Resistance leadership and incapacitating Leia , who survives by using the Force .
Disapproving of new leader Vice Admiral Holdo 's passive strategy , Poe helps Finn , BB-8 , and mechanic Rose Tico embark on a secret mission to disable the First Order 's tracking device .
Meanwhile , Rey arrives on Ahch - To with Chewbacca and R2-D2 aboard the Millennium Falcon to recruit Luke Skywalker to the Resistance .
Disillusioned by his failure to train Kylo as a Jedi , and under self - imposed exile from the Force , Luke refuses to help – even after he learns of Han Solo 's death at Kylo 's hands – and believes the Jedi should go extinct .
Unbeknownst to Luke , Rey and Kylo communicate through the Force , puzzling the two enemies .
As Rey and Kylo learn about each other , both have visions of themselves as future partners .
R2-D2 persuades Luke to train Rey .
After Kylo tells Rey what happened between him and Luke that caused him to choose the dark side , Luke confesses that he momentarily contemplated killing Kylo upon sensing that Supreme Leader Snoke was corrupting him , causing Kylo to destroy Luke 's new Jedi Order in retaliation .
Convinced that Kylo can be redeemed , Rey leaves Ahch - To without Luke .
Luke prepares to burn the Ahch - To Jedi temple and library , but hesitates .
Yoda 's ghost appears and destroys the temple by summoning a bolt of lightning , claiming Rey has all she needs to learn , and encourages Luke to learn from his failure .
Holdo reveals her plan to discreetly evacuate the remaining Resistance members using small transports .
Believing her actions cowardly and risky , Poe leads a mutiny .
Finn , Rose , and BB-8 travel to the Canto Bight casino and acquire the help of the hacker DJ .
They infiltrate Snoke 's ship , where all but BB-8 are captured by Captain Phasma .
Meanwhile , Rey lands on the ship , and Kylo brings her to Snoke , who says he facilitated the mental connection between her and Kylo as part of a plan to destroy Luke .
Ordered to kill Rey , Kylo instead kills Snoke and defeats Snoke 's guards alongside Rey .
Rey believes that Kylo has returned to the light side of the Force , but he instead invites her to rule the galaxy with him .
Refusing , she fights Kylo for possession of Anakin Skywalker 's lightsaber , which splits in two .
Leia recovers and stuns Poe , allowing the evacuation to begin .
Holdo remains on the ship to mislead Snoke 's fleet as the others flee to an abandoned Rebel Alliance base on Crait .
DJ reveals the Resistance 's plan to the First Order , and the evacuation transports are slowly destroyed .
Holdo sacrifices herself by ramming Snoke 's fleet at lightspeed ; Rey escapes in the chaos , while Kylo declares himself Supreme Leader .
BB-8 frees Finn and Rose , who escape after defeating Phasma , and join the survivors on Crait .
When the First Order arrives , Poe , Finn , and Rose attack with old speeders .
Rey and Chewbacca draw the TIE fighters away with the Falcon , while Rose stops Finn from completing a suicide run against the enemy siege cannon , which subsequently penetrates the Resistance fortress .
Luke appears and confronts the First Order to enable surviving Resistance members to escape .
Kylo orders the First Order 's forces to fire on Luke , to no effect .
He then engages Luke in a lightsaber duel ; upon striking Luke , Kylo realizes he has been fighting a Force projection of him .
Rey uses the Force to help the Resistance escape on the Falcon .
Luke , exhausted , becomes one with the Force and dies peacefully on Ahch - To .
Rey and Leia sense his death , and Leia tells surviving rebels that the Resistance has all it needs to rise again .
At Canto Bight , one of the children who helped Finn and Rose escape grabs a broom with the Force and gazes into space .
CAST * Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker , a powerful Jedi Master who has been in self - imposed exile on the planet Ahch - To .
* Hamill voices Dobbu Scay , named after the film 's editor , Bob Ducsay .
On Canto Bight , the character mistakes BB-8 for a slot machine .
* Carrie Fisher as General Leia Organa , twin sister to Luke , former princess of Alderaan , and a leading general in the Resistance .
* Adam Driver as Kylo Ren , Supreme Leader Snoke 's disciple , who is strong with the Force and leader to the Knights of Ren .
He is the son of Han Solo and Leia Organa , nephew of Luke Skywalker , and the grandson of Anakin .
* Daisy Ridley as Rey , a highly Force - sensitive scavenger from the desert planet Jakku who joined the Resistance and goes to find Luke Skywalker .
* John Boyega as Finn , a former stormtrooper of the First Order who defected to the Resistance .
* Oscar Isaac as Poe Dameron , a high - ranking X - wing fighter pilot in the Resistance .
* Andy Serkis as Supreme Leader Snoke , the leader of the First Order and Kylo Ren 's master .
*
Lupita Nyong'o as Maz Kanata , a pirate and ally of the Resistance .
* Domhnall Gleeson as General Hux , the former head of the First Order 's Starkiller Base .
* Anthony Daniels as C-3PO , a humanoid protocol droid in the service of Leia Organa .
* Gwendoline Christie as Captain Phasma , the commander of the First Order 's stormtroopers .
* Kelly Marie Tran as Rose Tico , a member of the Resistance who at the beginning works in maintenance .
* Laura Dern as Vice Admiral Amilyn Holdo , an officer in the Resistance .
* Frank Oz as Yoda , the deceased former Grand Master of the Jedi , and Luke 's wise former mentor , who appears as a Force - ghost .
* Benicio del Toro as DJ , an underworld codebreaker .
Joonas Suotamo appears as Chewbacca , taking over the role from Peter Mayhew after previously serving as his body double in The Force Awakens .
Mayhew , who was 73 years old and suffering from chronic knee and back pain , is credited as " Chewbacca consultant .
"
Billie Lourd , Mike Quinn , and Timothy D. Rose reprise their roles as Lieutenant Connix , Nien Nunb , and Admiral Ackbar respectively .
Due to the death of Erik Bauersfeld , Admiral Ackbar is now voiced by Tom Kane .
Amanda Lawrence appears as Commander D'Acy , and Mark Lewis Jones and Adrian Edmondson play Captains Canady and Peavey respectively .
BB-8 is controlled by puppeteers Dave Chapman and Brian Herring , with initial voice work by Ben Schwartz and final sound effects voiced by Bill Hader modulated through a synthesizer .
Jimmy Vee portrays R2-D2 , taking over the role from Kenny Baker , who died on August 13 , 2016 .
Veronica Ngo portrays Rose 's sister Paige Tico , a Resistance gunner who sacrifices her life to destroy a First Order dreadnought . Section::::Cast .
Justin Theroux plays the master codebreaker .
Lily Cole plays his companion .
Joseph Gordon - Levitt has a voice cameo as Slowen Lo .
Warwick Davis plays Wodibin .
Gareth Edwards , director of the Star Wars Anthology film Rogue One , has a cameo appearance as a Resistance Soldier , as does Gary Barlow .
Directors Edgar Wright and Joe Cornish also cameo in the film .
Hermione Corfield appears as Tallissan " Tallie " Lintra , a Resistance A - Wing pilot and squadron leader .
Noah Segan and Jamie Christopher appear as Resistance pilots Starck and Tubbs .
Hamill 's children , Griffin , Nathan , and Chelsea , cameo as Resistance soldiers .
Prince William , Duke of Cambridge and Prince Harry filmed cameo appearances as stormtroopers .
Tom Hardy also filmed an appearance as a stormtrooper , but his cameo was dropped from the final cut .
Hugh Skinner cameos as a Resistance Officer .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
In October 2012 , Star Wars creator George Lucas sold his production company Lucasfilm , and with it the Star Wars franchise , to The Walt Disney Company .
Disney announced a new trilogy of Star Wars films .
J. J. Abrams was named director of the first episode in the trilogy , The Force Awakens , in January 2013 .
In June 2014 , director Rian Johnson was reported to be in talks to write and direct its sequel , Episode VIII , and to write a treatment for the third film , Episode IX , with Ram Bergman producing both films .
Johnson confirmed in August 2014 that he would direct Episode VIII .
In September , filmmaker Terry Gilliam asked Johnson about what it felt like to take over something made famous by another filmmaker .
Johnson responded : The story begins immediately after the last scene of The Force Awakens .
Johnson had his story group watch films such as Twelve O'Clock High , The Bridge on the River Kwai , Gunga Din , Three Outlaw Samurai , Sahara , and Letter Never Sent for inspiration while developing ideas .
He felt it was difficult to work on the film while The Force Awakens was being finished .
In December 2015 , Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy said , " we have n't mapped out every single detail [ of the sequel trilogy ] yet " , and that Abrams was collaborating with Johnson and that Johnson would in turn work with ( then ) Episode IX director Colin Trevorrow to ensure a smooth transition .
Abrams is an executive producer along with Jason McGatlin and Tom Karnowski .
Lucasfilm announced the film 's title , Star Wars : The Last Jedi , on January 23 , 2017 .
During production , Hamill expressed disagreement with the direction his character was taken , finding the character 's more disillusioned status to be contradictory to his previous optimism .
Hamill later said that he regretted making his initial misgivings public and compared his disagreements to clashes he had with George Lucas during the filming of Return of the Jedi .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
In September 2015 , Disney shortlisted the female cast members to Gina Rodriguez , Tatiana Maslany , and Olivia Cooke .
Later that month , Benicio del Toro confirmed that he would play a villain in the film , and Mark Hamill was also confirmed .
In October 2015 , Gugu Mbatha - Raw was rumored to have been cast in the film .
In November , Jimmy Vee was cast as R2-D2 .
In November , Kennedy announced at the London premiere for The Force Awakens that the entire cast would return for Episode VIII , along with " a handful " of new cast members .
In February 2016 , at the start of filming , it was confirmed that Laura Dern and Kelly Marie Tran had been cast in unspecified roles .
In April 2017 , at Star Wars Celebration Orlando , Lucasfilm announced that Tran plays Resistance maintenance worker Rose Tico , which Johnson described as the film 's largest new role .
To keep Frank Oz 's return as Yoda a secret , producers excluded Oz 's name in the billing for the film 's pre - release marketing and ensured that Oz stayed on set during filming .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Second unit photography began during pre - production at Skellig Michael in Ireland on September 14 , 2015 , due to the difficulties of filming at that location during other seasons .
It would have lasted four days , but filming was canceled for the first day due to poor weather and rough conditions .
In November 2014 , Ivan Dunleavy , chief executive of Pinewood Studios , confirmed that the film would be shot at Pinewood , with additional filming in Mexico .
In September 2015 , del Toro revealed that principal photography would begin in March 2016 ; Kennedy later said filming would begin in January 2016 .
The production began work on the 007 Stage at Pinewood Studios on November 15 , 2015 .
Rick Heinrichs served as production designer .
In January 2016 , production of Episode VIII was delayed until February due to script rewrites .
Filming was in danger of being delayed further due to an upcoming strike between the Producers Alliance for Cinema and Television and the Broadcasting , Entertainment , Cinematograph and Theatre Union .
On February 10 , 2016 , Disney CEO Bob Iger confirmed that principal photography had begun under the working title Space Bear .
Additional filming took place in Dubrovnik , Croatia from March 9 to 16 , as well as in Ireland in May.
Malin Head in County Donegal and a mountain headland , Ceann Sibeal in County Kerry , served as additional filming locations .
To increase the scenes ' intimacy Driver and Ridley were both present when filming Kylo and Rey 's Force visions .
Location filming for the battle scenes on the planet Crait took place in July at the Salar de Uyuni salt flats in Bolivia .
Principal photography wrapped on July 22 , 2016 , though as of early September , Nyong'o had not filmed her scenes .
In February 2017 , it was announced that sequences from the film were shot in IMAX .
Production designer Rick Heinrichs said the original screenplay called for 160 sets , double what might be expected , but that Johnson did some " trimming and cutting " .
Ultimately 125 sets were created on 14 sound stages at Pinewood Studios .
According to creature designer Neal Scanlan , The Last Jedi uses more practical effects than any Star Wars film , with 180 to 200 creatures created with practical effects , some cut from the final edit .
For Yoda 's appearance in the film as a Force ghost , the character was created using puppetry , as was done in the original Star Wars trilogy ( as opposed to computer - generated imagery , which was used to create Yoda in most of the prequel trilogy ) .
The film 's Canto Bight sequence contains a reference to the 1985 Terry Gilliam film Brazil , in which Finn and Rose are arrested for committing parking violation 27B/6 .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
In July 2013 , Kennedy announced at Star Wars Celebration Europe that John Williams would return to score the Star Wars sequel trilogy .
Williams confirmed his assignment for The Last Jedi at a Tanglewood concert in August 2016 , stating he would begin recording the score " off and on " in December 2016 until March or April 2017 .
On February 21 , 2017 , it was confirmed that recording was underway , with both Williams and William Ross conducting the sessions .
In lieu of a traditional spotting session with Johnson , Williams was provided a temp track of music from his previous film scores as a reference for scoring The Last Jedi .
The score briefly quotes " Aquarela do Brasil " by Ary Barroso in its " Canto Bight " track as another reference to the film Brazil .
It also contains a brief quote of Williams performing his own theme for The Long Goodbye ( co - composed by Johnny Mercer ) during Finn and Rose 's escape , but this is not in the official soundtrack release .
The official soundtrack album was released by Walt Disney Records on December 15 , 2017 in digipak CD , digital formats , and streaming services .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
In January 2015 , Disney CEO Bob Iger stated that Episode VIII would be released in 2017 , and in March , Lucasfilm announced a release date of May 26 , 2017 .
In January 2016 , The Last Jedi was rescheduled for December 15 , 2017 in 3D and IMAX 3D. On January 23 , 2017 , the film 's title was announced as Star Wars : The Last Jedi .
Similarly to The Empire Strikes Back , Return of the Jedi and The Force Awakens , " Episode VIII " was included in the film 's opening crawl , although not in its official title .
The Last Jedi had its world premiere in Los Angeles on December 9 , 2017 .
The European premiere was held at London 's Royal Albert Hall on December 12 , 2017 , with a red carpet event .
It was reported that Disney had placed notable conditions on U.S. cinemas screening The Last Jedi , which some operators described as onerous .
Disney required that the film be screened in a cinema 's largest auditorium for a four - week period
( other Disney releases have had similar clauses , but only for two weeks ) , and was given a 65 % cut of ticket sales ( a percentage higher than the 55–60 % average of other major films , and cited as the highest split ever demanded by a Hollywood film behind the 64 % split of The Force Awakens ) .
The agreement , which was required to be kept confidential , also contained regulations on promotions and restrictions on removing any scheduled screening .
Violations were to be penalized with an additional 5 % cut of ticket sales .
Because of this , some cinemas declined to screen the film , particularly smaller or one - screen cinemas that would otherwise be barred from screening any other film during the commitment period .
Industry representatives considered this policy reasonable , citing the performance of Disney releases and the Star Wars franchise , and that the guaranteed business attracted by the film , and concession sales , would make up for the larger cut of ticket sales .
MARKETING Section::::Marketing .
A set of eight promotional postage stamps were released on October 12 , 2017 in the UK by the Royal Mail with artwork by Malcolm Tween .
On September 19 , 2017 , Australia Post released a set of stamp packs .
Tie - in promotional campaigns were done with Nissan Motors and Bell Media , among others .
Two main trailers were released , followed by numerous television spots .
Figurines of many of the characters were released in October , and advance tickets for Last Jedi went on sale in October .
Several tie - in books were released on the same day of the North American release of the movie , including The Last Jedi : Visual Dictionary , and various children 's reading and activity books .
Related novelizations included the prequel book Cobalt Squadron , and the Canto Bight , a collection of novellas about the Canto Bight Casino .
As with The Force Awakens , there is no official tie - in game for The Last Jedi , in favor of integrating content from the film into other Star Wars video games , including Star Wars Battlefront II , which introduced various content from the film , during the second week of the game 's first " season " .
An update to the MOBA mobile game added new content from the sequel era , including some characters as they appeared in The Last Jedi .
Characters from the film also appeared in the mobile RPG .
HOME VIDEO RELEASES Section::::Home video releases .
Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released Star Wars : The Last Jedi digitally in HD and 4 K via digital download and Movies Anywhere on March 13 , 2018 , with an Ultra HD Blu - ray , Blu - ray , and DVD physical release on March 27 .
It was the first Star Wars film to be released on the Ultra HD Blu - ray format .
TIE - IN LITERATURE AND MERCHANDISE Section::::Tie - in literature and merchandise .
The official novelization is by Jason Fry , with an audiobook version narrated by Marc Thompson .
There is a " junior novel " by Michael Kogge ( 2018 Lucasfilm Press ) , and an audiobook version narrated by Jessica Almasy .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Star Wars : The Last Jedi grossed $ 620.2million in the United States and Canada , and $ 712.6million in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 1.333billion .
It had a worldwide opening of $ 450.8million , the fifth - biggest of all time , including $ 40.6million that was attributed to IMAX screenings , the second biggest for IMAX .
It was estimated that the film would need to gross $ 800million worldwide to break even ; Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit of the film to be $ 417.5 million , when factoring together all expenses and revenues , making it the most profitable release of 2017 .
On December 31 , 2017 , its 17th day of release , it passed the $ 1 billion threshold , becoming the fourth film of 2017 , the fifteenth Disney film , the fourth Star Wars film and the thirty - second film overall to pass the mark .
The film was the highest - grossing film of 2017 , the second highest - grossing film in the franchise ( behind The Force Awakens ) , the fourth highest - grossing film released by Walt Disney Studios , the sixth highest - grossing film in North America and the ninth - highest - grossing film of all time .
UNITED STATES AND CANADA Section::::United States and Canada .
Pre - sale tickets went on sale in the United States on October 9 , 2017 , and as with The Force Awakens and Rogue One , ticket service sites such as Fandango had their servers crash due to heavy traffic and demand .
In the United States and Canada , industry tracking had The Last Jedi grossing around $ 200million from 4,232 theaters in its opening weekend .
The film made $ 45million from Thursday night previews , the second - highest amount ever ( behind The Force Awakens $ 57million ) .
It went on to make $ 104.8million on its first day ( including previews ) and $ 220million over the weekend , both the second - highest amounts of all time .
The opening weekend figure included an IMAX opening - weekend of $ 25million , the biggest IMAX opening of the year and the second biggest ever behind The Force Awakens .
After dropping by 76 % on its second Friday , the worst Friday - to - Friday drop in the series , the film fell by a total of 67.5 % in its second weekend , grossing $ 71.6million .
It was the largest second - weekend drop of the franchise , although it remained atop the box office .
The three day total was the 14th biggest second weekend of all time .
It grossed an additional $ 27.5million on Christmas Day , the second biggest Christmas Day gross of all time behind The Force Awakens ( $ 49.3million ) , for a four - day weekend total of $ 99million .
It made $ 52.4 million in its third weekend , again topping the box office .
It also brought its domestic total to $ 517.1 million , overtaking fellow Disney vehicle Beauty and the Beast as the highest of 2017 .
It was the sixth biggest third weekend of all time .
It had the seventh biggest New Year 's Day gross of all time with $ 14.3 million , bringing the four day total to $ 66.8 million .
It grossed $ 23.7 million and was surpassed the following weekend by ( which was in its third week ) and .
OUTSIDE
NORTH AMERICA Section::::Outside North America .
In its first two days of release the film made $ 60.8million from 48 markets .
The top countries were the United Kingdom ( $ 10.2million ) , Germany ( $ 6.1million ) , France ( $ 6million ) , Australia ( $ 5.6million ) and Brazil ( $ 2.5million ) .
By the end of the weekend , the film made $ 230.8million outside North America , the ninth - highest of all time .
This included $ 36.7million in the UK ( third - highest ) , $ 23.6million in Germany ( second - highest ) , $ 18.1million in France , $ 15.9million in Australia ( second - highest ) , $ 14.4million in Japan , $ 8.5million in Russia , $ 8.3million in Spain , $ 7.2million in Brazil , $ 7million in Italy and Mexico , $ 6.0million in Sweden and $ 5.1million in South Korea .
On its second weekend , it grossed $ 76.1million overseas and became the fourth - highest - grossing film of the year in Europe .
As of January 21 , the largest markets outside of the United States and Canada are the United Kingdom ( $ 109.3million ) , Germany ( $ 79.8million ) , France ( $ 63.5million ) , Japan ( $ 60.8million ) and Australia ( $ 43.5million ) .
The film had a $ 28.7 million opening weekend in China , the lowest for a Star Wars film in that country since 2005 .
Star Wars : The Force Awakens opened to $ 52 million two years prior and Rogue One , which featured Chinese stars Donnie Yen and Jiang Wen ,
opened to $ 30 million in 2016 .
The Last Jedi added only $ 7 million during the week , to reach a total of $ 34.2 million in its first seven days .
A week after its debut , China 's movie exhibitors dropped the film 's showtimes by 92 percent , from its 34.5 % percent share of the territory 's total screenings .
The film grossed $ 910,000 in its third weekend , dropping to ninth place at the Chinese box office , overshadowed by new releases including Bollywood film Secret Superstar , Hollywood films Ferdinand and Wonder , and Chinese film A Better Tomorrow 2018 .
The Last Jedi grossed $ 41million in China , as of January 21 , 2018 .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , Star Wars : The Last Jedi has an approval rating of 91 % based on 409 reviews , with an average rating of 8.1/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , "
Star Wars :
The Last Jedi honors the saga 's rich legacy while adding some surprising twists — and delivering all the emotion - rich action fans could hope for . "
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 85 out of 100 , based on 56 critics , indicating " universal acclaim " .
Matt Zoller Seitz of RogerEbert.com gave the film four out of four stars , praising the surprises and risks that it took , writing that " The movie works equally well as an earnest adventure full of passionate heroes and villains and a meditation on sequels and franchise properties ...
[ The film ] is preoccupied with questions of legacy , legitimacy and succession , and includes multiple debates over whether one should replicate or reject the stories and symbols of the past .
"
Writing for Rolling Stone , Peter Travers gave the film 3.5 out of 4 stars , praising the cast and the direction : " You 're in hyper - skilled hands with Johnson who makes sure you leave the multiplex feeling euphoric .
The middle part of the current trilogy , The Last Jedi ranks with the very best Star Wars epics ( even the pinnacle that is The Empire Strikes Back ) by pointing the way ahead to a next generation of skywalkers – and , thrillingly , to a new hope . "
Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun - Times gave the film 3.5/4 stars , saying , " Star Wars : The Last Jedi ... does n't pack quite the same emotional punch [ as The Force Awakens ]
and it lags a bit in the second half , [ but ]
this is still a worthy chapter in the Star Wars franchise , popping with exciting action sequences , sprinkled with good humor and containing more than a few nifty ' callbacks ' to previous characters and iconic moments . "
For The Hollywood Reporter , Todd McCarthy said , " Loaded with action and satisfying in the ways its loyal audience wants it to be , writer - director Rian Johnson 's plunge into George Lucas ' universe is generally pleasing even as it sometimes strains to find useful and/or interesting things for some of its characters to do . "
Will Gompertz , arts editor of BBC News , gave the film 4/5 stars , writing " Rian Johnson ...
has not ruined your Christmas with a turkey .
His gift to you is a cracker , a blockbuster movie packed with invention , wit , and action galore . "
Mark Kermode , British film critic , gave the film 4/5 stars saying Johnson " proves himself the master of the balancing act , keeping the warring forces of this intergalactic franchise in near - perfect harmony " .
The unpredictability of the plot was appreciated by reviewers such as Alex Leadbeater of Screen Rant , who commented specifically that the death of Snoke was " the best movie twist in years " .
Creator of the franchise George Lucas , who was n't involved with the film 's production , described The Last Jedi as " beautifully made " shortly after its release .
His reaction to was generally more negative .
Conversely , Richard Brody of The New Yorker wrote , " Despite a few stunning decorative touches ( most of which involve the color red ) and that brief central sequence of multiple Reys , the movie comes off as a work that 's ironed out , flattened down , appallingly purified .
Above all , it delivers a terrifyingly calculated consensus storytelling , an artificial universality that is achieved , in part , through express religious references . "
Kate Taylor of The Globe and Mail gave the film 2/4 stars , saying the film suffered from too many new additions and writing , " Nifty new animals , a maturing villain , a flagging heroine , muffled humour – as it seeks to uphold a giant cultural legacy , this unfolding trilogy struggles to maintain a balance that often seems just out of reach . "
Owen Gleiberman of Variety criticized the film for being too derivative of the past movies by saying that " it 's now repeating things that have already been repeated .
The rebels - up - against - it plot , with our heroes worn down to the nub of their fighting spirit , feels like a rehash of what we went through a year ago in Rogue One , and the attempts to echo the look and mood and darkening design of ' The Empire Strikes Back ' now make clear that the new trilogy is an official monument to nostalgia " .
AUDIENCE RECEPTION Section::::Audience reception .
Audience reception measured by scientific polling methods was highly positive .
Audiences randomly polled by CinemaScore on opening day gave the film an average grade of " A " on an A+ to F scale .
Surveys from SurveyMonkey and comScore 's PostTrak found that 89 % of audience members graded the film positively , including a rare five - star rating .
User - generated scores on Rotten Tomatoes and Metacritic , which lack controlled sampling , were more negative , achieving ratings of 45 % and 4.5/10 , respectively .
Several reviewers speculated that coordinated vote brigading from internet groups and bots contributed to the low scores .
Quartz noted that some new accounts gave negative ratings to both The Last Jedi and , while Bleeding Cool stated that reviews for Thor had tapered off up to that point but " skyrocketed " afterwards .
In response to tampering claims , Rotten Tomatoes released a statement that they detected no unusual activity aside from a noticeable " uptick in the number of written user reviews " on The Last Jedi .
Reviewers characterized The Last Jedi as divisive among audiences .
Todd VanDerWerff of Vox found that dissatisfied fans saw the film as too progressive , disliked its humor , plot , or character arcs , or felt betrayed that it ignored fan theories .
Other reviewers made similar observations .
Particularly divisive was the reveal that Rey 's parents are insignificant ; many fans had expected her to be Luke 's daughter or to share a lineage with another character from the original trilogy .
There was also sentiment that Snoke 's character was underdeveloped and that Luke 's actions contradicted his previous heroic portrayal .
Reviewers stated that fan theories were held so strongly among some viewers that it was difficult for them to accept different stories , but that other viewers appreciated the film 's action , tone , and deviation from Star Wars tradition .
ACCOLADES MTV Movie & TV Awards !
scope="row " rowspan="4 " Academy Awards !
scope="row "
Art Directors Guild Awards !
scope="row " rowspan="2 " British Academy Film Awards !
scope="row " Costume Designers Guild ! scope="row " rowspan="9 " Empire Awards !
scope="row " rowspan="13 " Saturn Awards !
scope="row " rowspan="8 " Teen Choice Awards !
scope="row " rowspan="4 " Visual Effects Society Awards SEQUEL Section::::Sequel .
, the final installment of the sequel trilogy , is scheduled for release on December 20 , 2019 .
Principal photography began on August 1 , 2018 .
Colin Trevorrow was expected to direct the film , but on September 5 , 2017 , Lucasfilm announced that he had stepped down .
A week later , Lucasfilm announced that J. J. Abrams would return to direct Episode IX and co - write it with Chris Terrio .
Abrams and Terrio stated that Episode IX will bring together all three trilogies , with elements from the previous two trilogies .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS