SUICIDE SQUAD ( FILM )
Suicide Squad is a 2016 American superhero film based on the DC Comics supervillain team of the same name , distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures .
It is the third installment in the DC Extended Universe ( DCEU ) .
The film is written and directed by David Ayer and stars an ensemble cast featuring Will Smith , Jared Leto , Margot Robbie , Joel Kinnaman , Viola Davis , Jai Courtney , Jay Hernandez , Adewale Akinnuoye - Agbaje , Ike Barinholtz , Scott Eastwood , and Cara Delevingne .
In Suicide Squad , a secret government agency led by Amanda Waller recruits imprisoned supervillains to execute dangerous black ops missions and save the world from a powerful threat , in exchange for reduced sentences .
By February 2009 , a Suicide Squad film was in development at Warner Bros. Ayer signed on to write and direct in September 2014 , and by October , the casting process had begun .
Principal photography began in Toronto , Ontario on April 13 , 2015 , with additional filming in Chicago , Illinois , and ended in August that year .
Suicide Squad premiered in New York City on August 1 , 2016 , and was released in the United States in 2D , Real D 3D , IMAX and IMAX 3D on August 5 , 2016 .
Following a strong debut that set new box office records , the film grossed over $ 746 million worldwide , making it the 10th highest - grossing film of 2016 .
It received generally negative reviews from critics , who criticized the plot , direction , editing and characters , though Robbie 's performance received praise .
The film was nominated for and won multiple awards across various categories , including an Academy Award for Best Makeup and Hairstyling at the 89th Academy Awards , making it the first film in the DCEU to win an Academy Award .
A sequel is currently in development .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In the aftermath of Superman 's death , intelligence officer Amanda Waller convinces Washington D.C. officials to allow her to assemble Task Force X , a team of dangerous criminals imprisoned at Belle Reve Special Security Barracks .
The team consists of elite hitman Floyd Lawton , former psychiatrist Harleen Quinzel , pyrokinetic ex - gangster Chato Santana , opportunistic thief Digger Harkness , genetic mutant Waylon Jones , and specialized assassin Christopher Weiss .
They are placed under command of Colonel Rick Flag to be used as disposable assets in high - risk missions for the United States government .
Each member has a nanite bomb implanted in their neck , designed to detonate should any member rebel or try to escape .
One of Waller 's intended recruits is Flag 's girlfriend Dr. June Moone , an archaeologist possessed by a demonic witch known as the " Enchantress " .
She quickly turns on Waller , deciding to eradicate humankind with a mystical weapon for imprisoning her .
She besieges Midway City by transforming its populace into a horde of monsters , and summons her brother Incubus to assist her .
Waller then deploys the squad to extract a high - profile mark from Midway , which is reported to be under a terrorist attack .
Joining them is Katana , a Japanese swordswoman .
Harley 's homicidal lover Joker finds out about her predicament and tortures Belle Reve security officer Griggs into leading him to the facility where the nanite bombs are made .
There , he blackmails Dr. Van Criss into disabling Harley 's bomb .
Upon arrival , the squad 's helicopter is shot down , forcing them to proceed on foot to their target .
Boomerang inaccurately convinces Slipknot that the bombs are a ruse to keep them in check , who attempts to escape and is killed .
Meanwhile , the squad is ambushed by Enchantress ' minions .
They eventually fight their way through to a safe house , where they learn that their mark is Waller herself , who is attempting to cover up her involvement in Enchantress ' siege .
The squad escorts Waller to the rooftop for extraction , but the arriving helicopter has been hijacked by the Joker and his men , who open fire on the squad .
Harley 's bomb is disarmed by Dr. Van Criss , leaving Flag unable to execute her and allows her to climb aboard the helicopter .
Waller 's men subsequently shoot down the helicopter , and Harley falls out while the Joker is presumed dead , after which Harley rejoins the squad .
Alerted to Waller 's whereabouts , Enchantress ' minions arrive and kidnap her .
Deadshot finds Waller 's confidential files and learns the truth about Enchantress , Flag then being forced to confess the truth .
This causes the squad members to abandon him .
With Waller compromised , Flag relieves the squad of the mission but chooses to continue .
Realizing they have an opportunity to prove themselves , they soon rejoin him and locate Enchantress at a partially - flooded subway station .
Killer Croc and a group of Navy SEALs , led by Lieutenant GQ Edwards , go underwater to plant a bomb underneath Incubus .
El Diablo embraces his abilities and distracts Incubus long enough for the bomb to detonate underneath , killing them both as well as Edwards .
The remaining squad members battle Enchantress together but are ultimately defeated .
Enchantress offers to fulfill their deepest desires in exchange for their allegiance , and Harley feigns interest in order to get close enough to cut out Enchantress ' heart .
Killer Croc then throws explosives into Enchantress ' weapon and Deadshot shoots them , destroying the device .
Flag takes Enchantress ' heart and crushes it , finally freeing June from the curse .
Waller , still alive , emerges , and the squad members are returned to Belle Reve with ten years off their sentences .
All but Captain Boomerang are allowed special privileges .
The Joker , alive and unscathed , breaks into the penitentiary and rescues Harley .
In a mid - credits scene , Waller meets with Bruce Wayne , who agrees to protect her from the backlash against her role in Enchantress ' rampage in exchange for access to the government 's files on the expanding metahuman community while telling her to shut down Task Force X or else he and his " friends " will do it .
CAST * Will Smith as Floyd Lawton / Deadshot :
* Jared Leto as The Joker :
* Margot Robbie as Harleen
Quinzel / Harley Quinn : * Joel Kinnaman as Rick Flag : * Viola Davis as Amanda Waller :
* Jai Courtney as George " Digger " Harkness / Captain Boomerang : * Jay Hernandez as Chato Santana /
El Diablo :
*
Adewale Akinnuoye - Agbaje as Waylon Jones / Killer Croc :
* Cara Delevingne as June Moone / Enchantress :
* Karen Fukuhara as Tatsu Yamashiro / Katana :
* Ike Barinholtz as Griggs :
* Scott Eastwood as Lieutenant GQ Edwards :
* Adam Beach as Christopher Weiss
/ Slipknot :
A mercenary specializing in tactical grappling and scaling .
Section::::Cast .
Additionally , Ben Affleck appears as Bruce Wayne / Batman , and Ezra Miller appears as Barry Allen / Flash , reprising their roles from in cameo roles ; while Jason Momoa makes a brief photographic appearance as Arthur Curry / Aquaman .
Alain Chanoine portrays Incubus , the brother of Enchantress , who possesses the body of a businessman in Midway City .
Jim Parrack appears as Jonny Frost , and Common appears as Monster T , the Joker 's henchmen .
David Harbour portrays government official Dexter Tolliver , Alex Meraz portrays Navy SEAL Gomez , and Matt Baram portrays Dr. Van Criss , a scientist at Wayne Enterprises ' branch Van Criss Laboratories .
Shailyn Pierre - Dixon plays Zoe Lawton , Deadshot 's daughter , and Corina Calderon plays Grace Santana , Diablo 's wife .
David Ayer , writer and director of the film , makes a cameo appearance as a Belle Reve officer .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
The film was announced in 2009 with Dan Lin as producer , Stephen Gilchrist as co - producer and Justin Marks as the screenwriter .
David Ayer signed on to direct and write the film in September 2014 .
He later described the film to Empire Online as " Dirty Dozen with supervillains " .
Ayer had six weeks to write the screenplay , given the release date was already set .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
In October 2014 , Warner Bros. had initially offered Ryan Gosling , Tom Hardy , Margot Robbie , and Will Smith roles in the film .
In November , TheWrap revealed that Jared Leto was in talks for the role of Joker , which Gosling was originally sought for .
The main cast was announced by Warner Brothers in December 2014 with Smith , Hardy , Leto , Robbie , Jai Courtney , and Cara Delevingne as Deadshot , Rick Flag , Joker , Harley Quinn , Captain Boomerang , and Enchantress , respectively .
The studio was also considering Viola Davis , Octavia Spencer , and Oprah Winfrey for the role of Amanda Waller .
Following the announcement of the cast , comic book writer John Ostrander ( creator of the modern incarnation of the Suicide Squad ) talked with Comic Book Resources about the casting , saying , " I have no problem with the casting ... what I am really impressed by with all of the casting is that they are getting some very good actors to play these parts . "
In January 2015 , Davis expressed interest in playing Amanda Waller during an interview , saying " I 'm fascinated by [ Waller ] .
" Meanwhile , Tom Hardy had to drop out as Rick Flag because of scheduling issues with his film The Revenant .
Jake Gyllenhaal was then given an offer to replace Hardy as Flag , but he declined .
The studio was then looking at Joel Edgerton , Jon Bernthal , and Joel Kinnaman to play the role .
In February , Jay Hernandez joined the cast and Kinnaman was also confirmed to play Flag .
At the 87th Academy Awards , Davis confirmed that she had been cast as Amanda Waller .
In March 2015 , boxer Raymond Olubawale was reported to have an unspecified role in the film , and Scott Eastwood announced that he had been cast .
Later that month , it was confirmed that Adewale Akinnuoye - Agbaje and Karen Fukuhara had been cast as Killer Croc and Katana , respectively .
Adam Beach , Ike Barinholtz , and Jim Parrack were added to the cast in April 2015 .
In January 2016 , Ben Affleck was confirmed to reprise his role as Batman from .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Filming began on April 13 , 2015 .
On April 26 and 27 , filming was to take place at the Hy 's Steakhouse .
A " snowstorm " scene was filmed on April 29 on the Adelaide St. and in Ching Lane .
On May 5 , a few major scenes were filmed in downtown Toronto next to Yonge and Dundas Square .
Principal photography wrapped in August 2015 after additional filming took place in Chicago , Illinois .
Additional filming ensued in 2016 following Warner 's desire to make a more lighthearted and comedic tone akin to the trailers , especially as was criticized for being too somber ; it was reported the reshoots cost as much as $ 22 million ( more than the typical $ 6–10 million that additional filming costs ) .
It was also confirmed that Zack Snyder filmed a scene with the Flash while shooting Justice League in London , while Ayer was in post - production on Suicide Squad .
Ayer confirmed that the film was completed on June 24 , 2016 .
Despite the involvement of multiple editors in the process , only John Gilroy is named in the main credit sequence .
It was later revealed that many of Jared Leto 's scenes were omitted from the final cut .
An interview with Leto revealed that he was upset over the removal of his work .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Academy Award - winning composer Steven Price , who previously worked with Ayer on Fury , composed the score for Suicide Squad .
Suicide Squad : Original Motion Picture Score was announced for a release date of August 8 , 2016 .
A soundtrack album for the film , titled Suicide Squad :
The Album , was announced in June 2016 , and released on August 5 , 2016 .
The album 's first single , " Heathens " by Twenty One Pilots , was released on June 20 , 2016 .
A music video for the song , set in a prison and featuring footage from the film , was released on June 21 .
" Sucker for Pain " was released as the second single on June 24 .
The album 's third single , " Purple Lamborghini " by Skrillex and Rick Ross , was released on July 22 .
" Gangsta " by Kehlani ; " Standing in the Rain " by Action Bronson , Mark Ronson , and Dan Auerbach of The Black Keys ; " Medieval Warfare " by Grimes ; and a cover of Queen 's " Bohemian Rhapsody " performed by Panic !
at the Disco were released as four promotional singles on August 2 , August 3 , and August 4 , 2016 respectively , with " Medieval Warfare " and " Bohemian Rhapsody " being released on the same day .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Suicide Squad premiered at the Beacon Theatre in New York City on August 1 , 2016 .
The subsequent London premiere took place on August 3 , 2016 .
It was theatrically released in the United States and in the UK on August 5 , 2016 , in 2D , 3D and IMAX
3D. MARKETING Section::::Marketing .
Suicide Squad held a panel at the 2015 San Diego Comic - Con International , with stars Smith , Robbie , Courtney , Davis , and Kinnaman amongst those who appeared .
A trailer intended to be exclusive to the event premiered , but was leaked online , with Warner Bros. responding by stating they would not release an official version .
However , the following day , Warner Bros. released an official version , stating : "
Warner Bros. Pictures and our anti - piracy team have worked tirelessly over the last 48 hours to contain the Suicide Squad footage that was pirated from Hall H on Saturday .
We have been unable to achieve that goal .
Today we will release the same footage that has been illegally circulating on the web , in the form it was created and high quality with which it was intended to be enjoyed .
We regret this decision as it was our intention to keep the footage as a unique experience for the Comic - Con crowd , but we can not continue to allow the film to be represented by the poor quality of the pirated footage stolen from our presentation . "
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Suicide Squad was released on Digital HD on November 15 , 2016 , and on Blu - ray , 4 K Ultra - HD Blu - Ray , Blu - Ray 3D , and DVD on December 13 , 2016 .
An extended cut of the film is included in the home entertainment release , containing roughly thirteen minutes of footage absent from the theatrical version .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Suicide Squad was a box office success , grossing $ 325.1 million in the United States and Canada and $ 421.7 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 746.8 million , against a production budget of $ 175 million ( $ 325 million including advertising and promotion costs ) .
Suicide Squad was highly anticipated by audiences worldwide , despite the negative critical reception and lower - than - expected box office performance of in March .
It recorded a worldwide opening of $ 267.1 million from 59 countries and IMAX global debut of $ 18.2 million , both set new records for the month of August .
That is also the second - best debut worldwide for a DC property after Dawn of Justice ( $ 422.5 million ) and the seventh best for a superhero title .
The Hollywood Reporter highlighted that Dawn of Justice had an advantage of receiving a coveted day - and - date release with China , while Suicide Squad did not secure a release date in the country .
Forbes pointed out that had the film secured a release in China , it may well have matched or topped the $ 773 million total of Guardians of the Galaxy and the $ 782 million gross of Deadpool .
Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit of the film to be $ 158.45 million , when factoring together all expenses and revenues for the film , making it the 10th most profitable release of 2016 .
NORTH AMERICA Section::::North America .
Projections for its opening weekend in the United States and Canada were being continuously revised upwards starting from $ 100 million to as high as $ 150 million .
The film opened across 4,255 theaters , the widest for the month of August .
Of that , 382 theaters were in IMAX , over 490 large - format screens locations , 270 + drive - ins , 180 + D - Box locations and over 200 dine - in / luxury theaters .
It opened Friday , August 5 , 2016 , on about 11,000 screens and earned $ 65.1 million , marking the biggest August opening and single day , and the third biggest opening day gross of 2016 .
Of that , $ 5.8 million came from IMAX theaters , also a new August record .
This includes $ 20.5 million it earned from Thursday previews , which began at 6:00 pm , setting the record for biggest - ever preview of August and the second biggest for a non - sequel film ( behind Man of Steel ) .
IMAX comprised $ 2.4 million ( 12 % ) of that figure .
Much like Batman v Superman and The Dark Knight Rises , however , the film saw a steep Friday - to - Saturday decline , grossing $ 38.8 million ( a drop of 41 % ) .
In total , it earned $ 133.7 million in its opening weekend , setting records for the month of August ( previously held by Guardians of the Galaxy ) and for Will Smith 's career ( I Am Legend ) .
It is also the second - biggest debut for a non - sequel , behind The Hunger Games ( $ 152 million ) , the fourth biggest of the year and the fifth biggest for Warner Bros. IMAX made up $ 11 million of the opening numbers from 382 theaters , $ 200,000 shy of breaking Guardians of the Galaxys record .
Nevertheless , it did beat Guardians of the Galaxys $ 7.6 million in terms of premium large format screens which comprised $ 13 million .
For Cinemark XD screens , which made $ 3.2 million , the sixth - highest opening .
The opening numbers helped Warner Bros. push past the $ 1 billion mark in North America for the sixteenth year in a row .
The film also helped the total weekend tickets sales to an unprecedented $ 221.3 million in August .
Previously , August has not exceeded $ 200 million at the box office in a single weekend in North America .
Suicide Squad scored a massive debut primarily on the backs of the under-35 set which made up 76 % of the opening weekend .
Audiences were also diverse , with African - Americans making up 41 % of the patrons .
Following its record breaking opening weekend , it posted the biggest August Monday gross with $ 13.1 million , a drop of 56.5 % from its Sunday gross .
This broke Guardians of the Galaxys previous record of $ 11.7 million , and also the biggest August Tuesday with $ 14.3 million , up 9 % from its Monday take .
The film has earned the biggest Friday , Saturday , Sunday , Monday and Tuesday in August history .
It made $ 179.1 million in its first week of release , the fourth biggest of the year .
Despite earning $ 13.4 million on its second Friday , the film dropped 79 % , slightly less than Batman v Supermans 81 % drop .
Following a first - place finish in its first weekend of release , the film faced a steep decline of 67.2 % in its second weekend , earning an estimated $ 43.8 million to score the biggest August second weekend gross .
It also passed the $ 200 million mark in ten days and was able to hold the top spot for the second time in a row despite competition from the comedy Sausage Party .
However , the drop is one of the biggest declines for a studio superhero film , and for Warner Bros. , which The Hollywood Reporter called it " deja vu all over again " after Batman v Superman tumbled 69 % in its second weekend earlier in the year .
The second weekend decline is the second biggest in summer history , behind Warcrafts historic 70 % drop in June of the same year .
The site also highlighted possible reasons for the significantly steep drop : dismal reviews , general apathy among moviegoers , altering movie - going habits and competition .
After three weeks of holding the top spot , it was overtaken by
Do n't Breathe on its fourth weekend .
It maintained the second spot in its fifth weekend and registered its best hold with a -20 % decline while also passing the $ 300 million threshold on its thirty - second day of release .
It remained in the top ten for eight weekends until falling off in its ninth weekend .
OUTSIDE NORTH
AMERICA Section::::Outside North America .
Internationally , Suicide Squad secured a release in approximately 62 countries .
It was released in 57 countries ( 70 % of the marketplace ) in conjuncture with its North American debut , including France , South Korea , Australia , Russia and the CIS , Brazil , the United Kingdom , Republic of Ireland , Spain and Mexico beginning from Wednesday , August 3 .
According to trackings , the film was projected to have an opening anywhere between $ 85 million to $ 120 million , which would be a new August international debut record .
Deadline Hollywood pointed out that although the film is a lesser known property , similar to Guardians of the Galaxy , stars such as Will Smith are better known internationally , which could potentially aid the film 's performance .
It opened Wednesday , August 3 , 2016 , in 7 countries , earning $ 8.1 million .
It opened in 50 more countries on August 4 and 5 , earning $ 53.8 million for a three - day total of $ 64.6 million from 57 countries .
Through Sunday , August 7 , it delivered a five - day opening of $ 133.3 million from 57 countries on 17,630 screens , nearly double the previous August record held by Guardians of the Galaxy .
It also set IMAX opening record with $ 7 million .
It added $ 58.7 million on its second weekend , a drop of 57 % on 15,600 screens in 62 territories .
After two straight wins , it was overtaken by the animated The Secret Life of Pets in its third weekend .
It recorded the biggest opening day of all time for Warner Bros. in Russia ( $ 3.9 million ) , the biggest August opening day in the United Kingdom ( $ 6.2 million ) , Brazil ( $ 3 million ) , South Korea ( $ 2.9 million , also the second biggest Warner Bros. opening day ) , France ( $ 2.7 million ) , Sweden ( $ 564,000 ) and Holland ( $ 517,000 , also the biggest opening of the year ) .
Mexico and Spain opened with $ 3.9 million and $ 1.4 million respectively .
In terms of opening weekend , the film recorded the biggest Warner Bros. opening of all time in Russia ( $ 11.4 million ) .
In Brazil , despite playing amidst the 2016 Summer Olympics , it managed to open with $ 11.75 million , marking the biggest August opening weekend of all time , the biggest Will Smith opening , and the fourth biggest opening for a superhero film .
Its opening numbers alone made it the second biggest film for the studio there .
In South Korea , although the film was off to a strong start , however , it was eventually overtaken by The Last Princess and Operation Chromite debuting at No . 3 .
It made $ 10.8 million in five days ( Wednesday to Sunday ) .
The U.K. and Ireland posted the biggest opening market for the film with £ 11.25 million ( $ 14.8 million ) from 573 theaters .
Discounting previews , it delivered the third - biggest UK opening of the year , behind Batman v Superman : Dawn of Justice ( £ 14.62 million ) and Captain America : Civil War ( £ 14.47 million ) .
It also became the first new released film of August since 2014 to debut above £ 3 million .
Elsewhere , it scored the biggest August opening in Australia ( $ 10.5 million ) , Mexico ( $ 10.4 million ) and Argentina ( $ 2.5 million ) , while in Spain , it recorded the biggest DC opening with $ 3.4 million , where it was behind The Secret Life of Pets for the weekend and France a $ 7.9 million opening .
It opened in first place in India for a non - local film with $ 1.8 million from 462 screens , despite facing competition from Jason Bourne ( $ 1.1 million from 1,027 screens ) which also opened on the same weekend .
Despite the later film occupying twice the screen number of the former , Suicide Squad managed to take the top spot .
Italy opened with an estimated $ 2.2 million in two days , that 's the biggest opening for Smith there .
It opened in first place in Germany with $ 6.9 million .
It opened in Japan – the film 's last market – on September 9 where it debuted with $ 3.8 million .
It finished in second spot ( and first among new releases ) behind local anime Your Name .
With such a robust opening , Variety projected that the film would end its run there around $ 20 million .
It has so far grossed $ 9.4 million there .
In terms of total earnings , its biggest market outside of North America is the UK ( $ 43.3 million ) , followed by Brazil ( $ 35.1 million ) and Mexico ( $ 27.1 million ) .
In two weeks , it became the second - highest - grossing Warner Bros. film of all time in Brazil behind Dawn of Justice .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Suicide Squad received negative reviews from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 28 % based on 341 reviews , with a weighted average rating of 4.8/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Suicide Squad boasts a talented cast and a little more humor than previous DCEU efforts , but they are n't enough to save the disappointing end result from a muddled plot , thinly written characters , and choppy directing . "
On Metacritic , the film has a normalized score of 40 out of 100 , based on 53 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B+ " on an A+ to F scale , while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave it a 73 % overall positive score .
Rolling Stones Peter Travers wrote , " DC Comics tries something different with Suicide Squad , an all - star collection of crime fighting villains — and the result is anything but super . "
Richard Lawson of Vanity Fair said , " Suicide Squad is just bad .
It 's ugly and boring , a toxic combination that means the film 's highly fetishized violence does n't even have the exciting tingle of the wicked or the taboo .
" Writing for The Wall Street Journal , Joe Morgenstern heavily criticized the film saying , " In a word , Suicide Squad is trash .
In two words , it 's ugly trash . "
He further said , it " amounts to an all - out attack on the whole idea of entertainment , " and called the film a product of " shameless pandering " .
Chris Nashawaty of Entertainment Weekly gave the film B−
saying , " Suicide Squad kicks off with fizzy , punk - rock ferocity before turning flat and spiraling into familiar formulas , " and called Jared Leto 's " scene - stealing " Joker " wasted " and " stranded in the periphery " .
He concluded by saying , " For DC , Suicide Squad is a small step forward .
But it could have been a giant leap .
"
IGN gave the film 5.9/10 , saying : " Suicide Squad is a decidedly different flavor than .
It goes for subversive , funny and stylish , and it succeeds wildly during the first act .
But then the movie turns into something predictable and unexciting . "
Drew McWeeny from HitFix gave it a positive review , writing " Suicide Squad is not the darkest mainstream superhero comic book movie ever made , nor is it even the darkest live - action film featuring Batman ever made .
However , it is gleefully nihilistic , and it takes a different approach to what has become a fairly familiar story form at this point , right at the moment when it feels like superhero movies either have to evolve or die . "
Brian Truitt from USA Today wrote , " Compared to its ilk , Suicide Squad is an excellently quirky , proudly raised middle finger to the staid superhero - movie establishment . "
Margot Robbie 's performance as Harley Quinn was better received , with many critics eager to see more of the character in future films .
In January 2017 , David Ayer later said he wished he had done certain things differently in the film including story elements , as well as giving more screen time to the Joker .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
Suicide Squad was nominated for various awards , winning several .
The film was nominated for three Grammy Awards as well as one Critics ' Choice Movie Awards ( winning one ) , seven People 's Choice Awards ( winning one ) and received multiple Teen Choice Awards nominations , including " Choice AnTEENcipated Movie " , " Choice Movie Actor :
AnTEENcipated " for Will Smith and Scott Eastwood , and " Choice Movie Actress : AnTEENcipated " for Margot Robbie and Cara Delevingne .
It won in both the former and latter categories .
The film won an Academy Award for Best Makeup and Hairstyling at 89th Academy Awards , making it the first film in the DC Extended Universe to win an Academy Award .
SEQUEL AND SPIN - OFFS
SEQUEL
Section::::Sequel and spin - offs .
Section::::Sequel .
In March 2016 , it was announced that Warner Bros. would bring Ayer and Smith back for a sequel , to be shot in 2017 .
The following month , Ayer expressed an interest in making the sequel R - rated .
Fukuhara has stated that she wants to explore Katana 's backstory in the sequel , and Courtney has expressed his hopes of reprising his role .
In February 2017 , it was reported that the studio had a shortlist of potential directors for the sequel , including Mel Gibson .
In March of that same year , Adam Cozad was hired as screenwriter for the film .
In July , Jaume Collet - Serra was named as the studio 's first choice to helm the sequel after Gibson dropped out , with production scheduled for mid-2018 ; Zak Penn had also submitted a story treatment and
a new script was being written .
That same month , the film was titled Suicide Squad 2 at the San Diego Comic - Con .
Leto was confirmed to reprise his role as the Joker in the film .
In September 2017 , it was announced Gavin O'Connor had signed on as writer and director for the film .
On June 7 , 2018 , Todd Stashwick announced that he would be co - writing the film with O'Connor .
In August 2018 , it was announced production had been put on hold to allow O'Connor and Smith to work on other projects , and would likely begin filming in late 2019 .
However , it was announced in October 2018 that the sequel is now being written by Guardians of the Galaxy director James Gunn , who is also in talks to direct .
SPIN - OFFS Section::::Spin - offs .
In addition , it was later announced in September 2016 that Warner Bros. was planning a film focusing on Harleen Quinzel / Harley Quinn , with Robbie serving as executive producer and Christina Hodson serving as the screenwriter for the film .
That film was announced as Birds of Prey ( And the Fantabulous Emancipation of One Harley Quinn ) on November 20 , 2018 .
In December 2016 , it was announced that Ayer will return to the franchise as director and producer of Gotham City Sirens , a film based on the comic book team of the same name , consisting of Harley Quinn , Selina Kyle / Catwoman and Pamela Isley / Poison Ivy .
In December 2016 , it was also reported that the studio is developing a film focusing on Floyd Lawton / Deadshot , which will star Smith .
In August 2017 , another film focusing on the Joker and Harley Quinn entered development with Glenn Ficarra and John Requa in final negotiations to be the co - writer / co - director team handling the project .
SEE ALSO NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS