ARRIVAL ( FILM )
Arrival is a 2016 American science fiction film directed by Denis Villeneuve and written by Eric Heisserer .
It is based on the 1998 short story " Story of Your Life " by Ted Chiang , and stars Amy Adams , Jeremy Renner , and Forest Whitaker .
The film follows a linguist enlisted by the U.S. Army to discover how to communicate with aliens who have arrived on Earth , before tensions lead to war .
The film had its world premiere at the Venice Film Festival on September 1 , 2016 , and was released in the United States and Canada by Paramount Pictures on November 11 , 2016 .
It grossed $ 203 million worldwide and received praise for Adams 's performance , Villeneuve 's direction , and its exploration of communicating with extraterrestrial intelligence .
Considered one of the best films of 2016 , Arrival appeared on numerous critics ' year - end lists , and was selected by the American Film Institute as one of ten " Movies of the Year " .
It received eight nominations at the 89th Academy Awards , including Best Picture , Best Director , and Best Adapted Screenplay , winning for Best Sound Editing .
It also received Golden Globe nominations for Best Actress for Adams and Best Original Score for Jóhann Jóhannsson , and was awarded the Ray Bradbury Award for Outstanding Dramatic Presentation and the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation in 2017 .
The score by Jóhannsson was nominated for Best Score Soundtrack For Visual Media at the 60th Grammy Awards .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Linguist Louise Banks 's daughter , Hannah , dies in adolescence from an incurable illness .
Twelve extraterrestrial spacecraft appear at separate locations around the Earth .
A U.S. Army officer , Colonel G.T. Weber , recruits Banks and physicist Ian Donnelly to find out why the aliens have come .
Weber takes them to an army encampment in Montana near one of the craft .
On board , Banks and Donnelly make contact with two seven - limbed aliens , whom they call " heptapods " ; Donnelly nicknames them Abbott and Costello .
Banks and Donnelly begin researching their written language of complicated circular symbols .
As Banks studies the language , she starts to have visions of a child who seems to be her daughter .
When Banks is able to ask why the aliens have come , they answer " offer weapon " .
However , China translates this as " use weapon " , prompting them to break off communications , and other nations follow .
Banks argues that the symbol interpreted as " weapon " might mean " tool " , and that China 's translation likely results from the competitive nature of their interaction with the aliens .
Rogue soldiers plant a bomb in the Montana craft .
Unaware , Banks and Donnelly re - enter the alien vessel , and the aliens give them an extremely complex message .
Just before the bomb explodes , one of the aliens ejects Donnelly and Banks , knocking them unconscious .
When they reawaken , the military is preparing to evacuate , and the craft has moved out of reach .
Donnelly discovers that the symbol for time is present throughout the message , and that the writing occupies exactly one - twelfth of the space in which it is projected .
Banks suggests that the full message is split among the twelve craft and that the aliens want all the nations to share what they learn .
China 's General Shang issues an ultimatum to the aliens , demanding that they leave within 24 hours .
Russia , Pakistan , and Sudan follow suit .
Banks goes alone to the craft and it sends down a shuttle to transport her inside .
One of the aliens is dying from the explosion ; the other explains that they have come to help humanity , for in 3,000 years they will need humanity 's help in return .
The " weapon " is their language , which changes humans ' linear perception of time , allowing them to experience " memories " of things that have yet to happen .
Banks 's visions of the child are actually premonitions of her future daughter , Hannah .
Banks returns to the camp as it is being evacuated , and tells Donnelly that the alien language is the " tool " ; those who master it are able to perceive the future and past .
She has a premonition of a United Nations event , in which Shang thanks her for having convinced him to call off the attack by calling his private number and reciting his wife 's dying words : " In war there are no winners , only widows .
" In the present , Banks steals a satellite phone , calls the number , and recites the words .
The Chinese announce they are standing down and release their twelfth of the message .
The other countries follow suit , and the twelve craft depart .
During the evacuation of the camp , Donnelly expresses his love for Banks .
They talk about life choices and whether he would change them if he could see the future .
Banks knows that she will agree to have a child with him despite knowing their fate : that Hannah will die and Donnelly will leave them after she reveals that she knew this .
CAST * Amy Adams as Louise Banks * Jeremy Renner as Ian Donnelly * Forest Whitaker as Colonel
G. T. Weber * Michael Stuhlbarg as Agent Halpern * Mark O'Brien as Captain Marks * Tzi Ma as General Shang * Abigail Pniowsky as 8-year - old Hannah * Julia Scarlett Dan as 12-year - old Hannah * Jadyn Malone as 6-year - old Hannah * Frank Schorpion as Dr. Kettler PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production . Section::::Development .
Villeneuve had wanted to make a science fiction film for some time , although he " never found the right thing " .
Although Villeneuve went through " hundreds " of possible titles , Arrival was the first one his team of producers and writers had suggested .
WRITING Section::::Writing .
Screenwriter Eric Heisserer had unsuccessfully been pitching an adaptation of Ted Chiang 's novella " Story of Your Life " for years , and by the time producers Dan Cohen and Dan Levine approached him about a potential sci - fi project , he had largely given up on the idea .
Cohen and Levine , however , introduced Villeneuve to the novella , which the director immediately took to , although his work on Prisoners meant that he did not have the time to properly adapt it into a screenplay with Heisserer .
Cohen and Levine completed a first draft , which Villeneuve and Heisserer reworked into the final script .
Villeneuve changed the title , as he felt the original title sounded like a romantic comedy and that the script had become very different from the short story .
Heisserer said that earlier versions of the script had a different ending : the gift from the heptapods was to have been " blueprints to an interstellar ship , like an ark of sorts " , to enable humanity to help them in 3,000 years .
But after the release of Interstellar in 2014 , Heisserer and Villeneuve agreed that this would not work , and decided that the heptapods ' gift would be what was " there in front of us … the power of their language " .
LINGUISTICS Section::::Linguistics .
Both the book and the screenwriting required the innovation of a form of alien linguistics which recurs in the plot .
The film uses a script designed by the artist Martine Bertrand ( wife of the production designer Patrice Vermette ) , based on the scriptwriter 's original concept .
Computer scientists Stephen and Christopher Wolfram analyzed it to provide the basis for Banks 's work in the film .
Three linguists from McGill University were consulted .
The sound files for the alien language were created with consultation from Morgan Sonderegger , a phonetics expert .
Lisa Travis was consulted for set design during the construction of the protagonist 's workplaces .
Jessica Coon , a Canada Research Chair in Syntax and Indigenous Languages , was consulted for her linguistics expertise during review of the script .
Heisserer said at the Alamo Drafthouse 's Fantastic Fest premiere at the end of September 2016 that Shang 's wife 's last words , translated into English , were " In war , there are no winners , only widows " .
Villeneuve decided not to include subtitles for the line ; Heisserer said he would have preferred it not be kept secret , and was happy to reveal the translation .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Jeremy Renner joined the film on March 6 , 2015 , to play a physics professor .
Forest Whitaker signed on in April 2015 , with Michael Stuhlbarg joining as CIA Agent Halpern that June .
Linguistics professor Dr. Jessica Coon was brought on to consult with Amy Adams .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography lasted for 56 days , commencing on June 7 , 2015 , after Renner had finished on .
The shooting was done mainly in and around Montreal , Quebec , Canada , with Saint - Fabien serving as Montana .
The team took some time to find the right site to represent the landing , because producers wanted to avoid a mountainous site that might dwarf the scale of the ship , but thought that a barren location would be clichéd .
Most of the filming that did not involve the exterior of a ship was done indoors on stages , although a real house was used as Banks 's home .
The scenes of the university where Banks teaches were shot at the HEC Montréal .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Jóhann Jóhannsson began writing the score as shooting started , drawing on the screenplay and concept art for inspiration .
He developed one of the main themes in the first week using vocals and experimental piano loops .
Max Richter 's piece " On the Nature of Daylight " is featured in the film 's opening and closing scenes .
Due to the prominent use of Richter 's music in the final film , Jóhannsson 's score was deemed ineligible for the Academy Award for Best Original Score , with the rationale being that voters would be influenced by the use of pre - existing music when judging the merits of the score .
The soundtrack was released by Deutsche Grammophon on November 11 , 2016 .
All music was composed by Jóhannsson .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
A teaser trailer was released in August 2016 , followed the next week by the first official trailer .
Paramount Pictures released a series of promotional posters , with one showing a UFO hovering above a Hong Kong skyline that included Shanghai 's Oriental Pearl Tower .
The inaccuracy angered Hong Kong social media users .
The posters were withdrawn and a statement attributed the inaccuracy to a third - party vendor .
In May 2014 , while titled Story of Your Life , Paramount acquired the U.S. and Canadian distribution rights .
Shortly after , Sony Pictures
Releasing International and Stage 6 Films acquired some international distribution rights , while Entertainment One acquired the UK distribution rights and Roadshow Films acquired Australian distribution rights , as well as other distributors like Spentzos Films for Greece , Lev Cinemas for Israel and Chantier Films for Turkey .
The film had its world premiere at the Venice Film Festival on September 1 , 2016 .
It also screened at the Toronto International Film Festival , Telluride Film Festival , and the BFI London Film Festival .
The film was released on November 11 , 2016 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Arrival was released on Digital HD on January 31 , 2017 and on Ultra HD Blu - ray , Blu - ray and DVD on February 14 , 2017 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Arrival grossed $ 100.5 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 102.8 million in other countries , for a worldwide total of $ 203.4 million , against a production budget of $ 47 million .
In the United States and Canada , Arrival was released alongside Almost Christmas and Shut In , and was originally expected to gross around $ 17 million from 2,317 theaters in its opening weekend , with the studio projecting a more conservative debut of $ 12–15 million .
The film made $ 1.4 million from Thursday night previews at 1,944 theaters and $ 9.4 million on its first day , pushing projections up to $ 24 million .
It ended up grossing $ 24.1 million over the weekend , finishing third at the box office .
In its second weekend , the film grossed $ 12.1 million ( a drop of 49.6 % ) , and in its third made $ 11.5 million ( dropping just 5.6 % ) .
Following receiving its eight Oscar nominations , the film returned to 1,221 theaters on January 27 , 2017 ( an increase of 1,041 from the week before ) and grossed $ 1.5 million ( up 357.4 % from its previous week 's $ 321,411 ) .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 94 % based on 382 reviews , with an average rating of 8.4/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Arrival delivers a must - see experience for fans of thinking person 's sci - fi that anchors its heady themes with genuinely affecting emotion and a terrific performance from Amy Adams . "
On Metacritic , the film has a score of 81 out of 100 , based on 52 critics , indicating " universal acclaim " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B " on an A+ to F scale .
Brian Tallerico , from RogerEbert.com , gave the film three out of four : " It 's a movie designed to simultaneously challenge viewers , move them and get them talking .
For the most part , it succeeds .
"
At Time.com , Sam Lansky described it as " sophisticated , grownup sci - fi :
a movie about aliens for people who do n't like movies about aliens .
" IGN reviewer Chris Tilly gave it a score of 8.5 out of 10 , saying : " Arrival is a language lesson masquerading as a blockbuster , though much more entertaining than that sounds … it 's smart , sophisticated sci - fi that asks BIG questions , and does a pretty good job of answering them . "
Film critic Robbie Collin gave Arrival five out of five , calling it : " introspective , philosophical and existentially inclined – yet unfolds in an unwavering tenor of chest - tightening excitement .
And there is a mid - film revelation – less a sudden twist than sleek unwinding of everything you think you know –
that feels , when it hits you , like your seat is tipping back . "
The Guardian rated it as the third - best film of 2016 .
Critic Catherine Shoard said that it " amounts to something transcendent ; something to reignite your excitement for cinema , for life . "
Numerous other publications , including io9 , Den of Geek , WhatCulture , Mir Fantastiki , The Atlantic , Blastr , and Digital Trends named Arrival the best movie of 2016 .
Rex Reed , writing for the New York Observer , gave the film one out of four , calling it Villeneuve 's " latest exercise in pretentious poopery " and referring to a lack of action in the storyline .
ACCOLADES SEE ALSO * 2016 in science fiction
* Amor fati
*
Ensō
* Fermat 's principle
* Linguistic relativity * Logogram * Novikov self - consistency principle
* Temporal paradox * Zero - sum game
* Semasiography , writing meaning without representation of sound NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Arrival at Letterboxd