GERMANY – SWITZERLAND BORDER
The border between the modern states of Germany and Switzerland extends to 362 km , mostly following the High Rhine between Lake Constance and Basel .
Much of the border is within the sphere of the Zurich metropolitan area and there is substantial traffic , both for commuting and for shopping across the border ; line S22 of the suburban Zürich S - Bahn even running across German territory , and the Swiss municipality of Kreuzlingen forming part of the conurbation of German Constance .
Similarly , Basel metropolitan area includes territory in both France and Germany .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The High Rhine has had the character of the northern border of the Old Swiss Confederacy since the Swabian War and the accession of Basel in 1499–1501 , dividing the Swiss Confederacy from the Swabian Circle of the Holy Roman Empire ; with the Peace of Westphalia of 1648 , the border acquired the status of an international border de jure .
With minor changes ( such as the acquisition of Rafzerfeld in 1651 ) , it remained unchanged since , even throughout the Napoleonic era when it divided two French client states ( Cisrhenian Republic and Helvetic Republic ) and later the Confederation of the Rhine from the restored Swiss Confederacy , and eventually the German Confederation from modern Switzerland .
The border persisted even during the Nazi era ( although with the Anschluss of Austria , the German - Swiss border technically included the Austrian - Swiss border from 1938 and until the formation of the German Federal Republic in 1949 ) .
On 12 December 2008 Switzerland implemented the Schengen Agreement .
This removed all passport controls for travellers crossing the border ; however , customs officers from both countries are still authorised to carry out customs checks on border crossers , as Switzerland is not in the EU Customs Union .
In mid-2016 , during the European migrant crisis , the German government deployed an additional 90 border guards and 40 police officers in order to reduce the level of illegal immigration passing through Switzerland .
GEOGRAPHY
Section::::Geography .
The German - Swiss border begins in at the German - Swiss - Austrian tripoint , which is located in the Lake Constance , approximately at .
The border makes landfall south of Constance .
The Lake Constance divides the German Bodenseekreis from the Swiss canton of Thurgau .
The stretch of border ( c. 1.5 km ) dividing Constance from Kreuzlingen comprises the only territory of Germany on the left bank of the High Rhine .
The border then runs along the Untersee , passing south of Reichenau .
At the lake 's exit it turns inland , towards the north , leaving Stein am Rhein within Switzerland , as well as the municipality of Ramsen ( canton of Schaffhausen ) .
It then returns to the Rhine , including Gailingen in Germany , but then turns north again to include the bulk of the canton of Schaffhausen , a right - bank territory including the town of Schaffhausen itself , in Switzerland , separating it from the German Schwarzwald - Baar - Kreis and Waldshut district .
Büsingen am Hochrhein ( Constance district ) is a German exclave which has borders with three Swiss cantons , namely Zurich , Schaffhausen and Thurgau .
The border returns to the Rhine downstream of the Rhine Falls , then separating the Waldshut district from the canton of Zürich , but then deviates from the river again to include the Rafzerfeld plain into Zürich 's Bülach district ( a right - bank territory historically acquired by the city of Zürich from the counts of Sulz in 1651 ) .
Downstream of Rafzerfeld , the border then sticks to the course of the Rhine until it enters the city of Basel , forming the northern border of the canton of Aargau as far as Kaiseraugst and then the canton of Basel - Land ( municipalities of Pratteln and Muttenz ) bordering on the German Lörrach district .
Besides the right - bank part of Basel proper ( Lesser Basel ) the border also includes the right - bank municipalities of Riehen and Bettingen into the canton of Basel Stadt .
The border then cuts across the E35 south of Weil am Rhein and back to the Rhine , where it terminates in the French - German - Swiss tripoint , dividing into the French - German and the French - Swiss borders .
The tripoint is located in the Rhine at .
A monument has been built near it , known as the Dreiländereck .
EXTERNAL LINKS
REFERENCES
* Thomas Wüthrich , Adrian Wiget , Beitrag zur Konstruktion der Landesgrenze Deutschland –
Schweiz i m Untersee swisstopo ( 2008 ) .