THE IMPACT OF GEOGRAPHY ON
COLONIAL AMERICA
Before the foundation of the United States in 1776,Kingdom of Great Britain owned Thirteen Colonies on eastern shore of North America .
The geography and climate of the area had a significant impact on the economy and survival of the colonies .
NEW ENGLAND COLONIES / NORTHERN COLONIES Section::::New England Colonies / Northern Colonies .
The New England colonies tried to help the Native Americans and also , known as the North - Eastern , included Massachusetts Colony , Rhode Island Colony , Connecticut Colony , and New Hampshire Colony .
The region was first found by people from Britain in 1620 .
These colonies provided fish , whale products , and lumber .
They imported agricultural products from other regions .
GEOGRAPHY
Section::::Geography .
The geology of New England includes many mountains , and it is thick with trees and rivers .
The forest provided large amounts of lumber for New England and led them to specialize in the shipbuilding industry .
However , the landscape was unsuitable for cereal crops , so they were imported from the other colonies .
Originally this region had fertile soil , but during the last glacial period , large glaciers scraped away .
CLIMATE Section::::Climate .
The New England region is located further north and it has longer winters and the coldest weather among all of the three regions .
Summer is mild and short .
The growing season is short .
PEOPLE Section::::People .
When English people made the Northern colonies they named their region " New England " for their homeland .
Famous people from the region included John Winthrop from Massachusetts , Roger Williams and Anne Hutchinson from Rhode Island , Thomas Hooker from Connecticut , and John Mason from New Hampshire .
Residents in the northern region were mostly Puritans .
That was the only religion throughout the New England Colonies because the Puritans wanted it that way .
There was no religious freedom in the region .
TRADE GOODS
Section::::Trade goods .
Since the soil and weather in New England was not suitable for farming , many people did not farm .
Instead , they imported crops from other regions or even other countries .
In return , they would trade products they had to other countries .
These products included fish , whale products , ships , timber products .
Also , they traded furs and livestock products made from animals living in the surrounding forests .
Using the large numbers of trees in the forest , people from New England worked at shipbuilding .
People in New England cut down trees for lumber to build ships .
They would then use them for fishing and hunting whales .
That is also a factor that affected what goods people in New England would trade .
There was much trade between New England and other regions or countries such as England .
New England would export resources like fish and lumber to Africa , England , and the West Indies .
Then from Africa , New England would receive hardworking slaves in return .
MIDDLE COLONIES Section::::Middle Colonies .
The middle colonies were the Delaware Colony , the New Jersey Colony , the New York Colony , and the Pennsylvania Colony .
Their climate helped them become the ' breadbasket ' of British North America .
Arable land was plentiful and the soil was fertile .
The excellent natural harbors helped the middle colonies become traders among the colonies .
Due in part to immigration from foreign ( Mainland Europe ) countries , the people were ethnically and religiously diverse .
GEOGRAPHY
Section::::Geography .
These colonies included New York , Pennsylvania , New Jersey , and Delaware .
New York is dominated by farms , forests , rivers , mountains , and lakes .
Manhattan Island is a well - known location of New York , originally called New Amsterdam .
Lake Erie is the great lake that New York shares a border with .
The Appalachian Mountains run through the middle of Pennsylvania .
Pennsylvania is bordered by New York , New Jersey , Delaware , Maryland , West Virginia , and Ohio .
This region also shares a border with Lake Erie .
Many rivers run through the state including the Ohio and Delaware Rivers .
On the Eastern Seaboard of the United States , Delaware is bordered by the Atlantic Ocean and Delaware Bay , as well as by the states of New Jersey , Pennsylvania and Maryland .
The area of Delaware , Pennsylvania , and New York is known as the Highlands .
The Atlantic Coastal Plain is a region along the middle colonies primarily composed of marsh , rivers , and swampland .
CLIMATE Section::::Climate .
Since the colonies were further south , the days were longer with a lot of sunlight and plenty of rain .
The climate in the coastal region of the middle colonies is moderate year round .
Average monthly temperatures range from 76 to 32 degrees .
The average temperature in the summer months is 74 degrees .
About 57 % of the days are sunny .
Annual precipitation is approximately 45 inches .
Temperatures along the Atlantic Coast are about 10 degrees warmer in winter and 10 degrees cooler in summer .
The average growing season varies from 170 to 200 days .
The Coastal Plain is humid in the summers and had temperate winters .
PEOPLE Section::::People .
The middle colonies contained Native American tribes of Algonquian and Iroquois language groups as well as a sizable percentage of African slaves during the early years .
Unlike solidly Puritan New England , the middle colonies presented an assortment of religions .
The presence of Quakers , Mennonites , Lutherans , Dutch Calvinists , and Presbyterians made the dominance of one faith next to impossible .
This was because some of the proprietors there believed in religious tolerance and some did not care as long the people paid for the land they inhabited .
Some wealthy people worked in the city although most colonists were farmers .
Because of fertile soil and a good growing season , most farmers grew enough for their family and a surplus , which they could sell .
They grew wheat , grains , and many other things .
New York and Philadelphia were the Middle Colonies ' biggest cities .
This was because they were the center of trade with all the harbors to import and export goods .
Many people were artisans or merchants with many skills .
Other people tried to become apprentices to learn their trade .
Other people became laborers .
They could find general work such as helping load or unload ships or being house servants .
Boys could learn shoe or boat making .
Girls could open a cloth shop .
However , most parents believed children should learn to run the family farm instead of going to college .
TRADE GOODS
Section::::Trade goods .
There were considerable differences between the New England , Middle and Southern regions .
Economic activities and trade was dependent of the environment in which the Colonists lived .
The geography and climate impacted the trade and economic activities of Middle Colonies .
The Middle Colonies exported agricultural products and natural resources .
The Middle colonies are often called the breadbasket colonies because they grew so many crops , especially wheat .
The Middle colonies built flour mills where wheat was ground into flour , then shipped to England .
A typical farm was 50 to 150 acres consisting of a house , barn , yard , and fields .
The Middle Colonies were also able to manufacture iron ore products such as plows , tools , kettles , nails and large blocks of iron which they exported to England .
Cottage industries such as weaving , shoe - making , cabinetmaking , and other crafts were prominent in middle colonies , particularly Pennsylvania .
The Middle Colonies were in the prime location for the growth of grains .
A predominant feature of the region is the Coastal Plain .
This region had humid summers and temperate winters which are prime conditions for agriculture .
Due to the climate of temperate summers , the grains were allowed to grow for longer periods of time .
Up north , the winters were much too harsh to grow these grains .
These grains were then exported to other Colonies due to its prime location to the ocean .
The climate was prime for these grains which is a direct correlation to how geography relates to trade goods in the Middle Eastern Colonies .
SOUTHERN COLONIES Section::::Southern colonies .
The southern British colonies in North America were the Colony of Virginia , Province of North Carolina , Province of South Carolina , and Province of Georgia .
The first successful English colony in N. America was Jamestown , established off the Chesapeake Bay in 1607 .
In 1668 King Charles II granted the Carolina charter to eight Lords Proprietor .
Georgia was not established as a colony until 1732 under a charter granted to James Oglethorpe by King George II .
GEOGRAPHY
Section::::Geography .
Located between 40 degrees and 30 degrees latitude , the physiographic makeup of the southern colonies is generally divided into three regions .
The Atlantic Coastal Plain ( divided into two parts ; the Inner Coastal Plain and the Tidewater ) , Piedmont , and the Blue Ridge Mountains and Appalachian mountain regions .
The Atlantic Coastal plains developed over the last 6,000 years , flattening out via the global flood as well as the transportation of sediment by river systems from the Appalachian Mountains .
Crisscrossed by these river systems , the area became known as the Tidewater region due to the noticeable effect of the ocean 's tides on the rivers that run through it .
French for " foothills " , the Piedmont is characterized by rolling hills stretching between the coastal plain and the Blue Ridge Mountains .
It is separated from the coastal plain by the " fall line " , line where elevation falls noticeably and is the sight of many waterfalls on the rivers in the region .
The Blue Ridge Mountains is a specific region of the Appalachians .
The ridgeline of the mountains varies from being 5 to 65 miles wide , with peaks averaging around 2000 to 4000 ft above sea level .
The area is covered in forests with hundreds of species of trees found within the range , and today are a source of timber .
Beyond the Blue mountains continues the rest of the Appalachians , except in Virginia where the Shenandoah valley opens up .
CLIMATE Section::::Climate .
While the southern coast of the United States is located in similar latitudes of Southern Spain and Morocco , the climate is dominated by weather patterns moving overland as opposed to the oceanic weather patterns that dominate Western Europe .
Due to this the east coast of North America is cooler than the regions congruent to it in the " Old World " , with climate in the United States being roughly equivalent to climates 40 - 60 degrees latitude in Europe .
During the time of colonization this effect was even more pronounced as the world was in the middle of the " Little Ice Age" .
The soil there is moist , which was perfect for farming .
DEMOGRAPHICS Section::::Demographics .
Colonization of the South during the period of 1600–1650 was mainly confined to Virginia and the Jamestown region in particular .
While the majority of people who initially arrived at Jamestown in the first few years of colonization were Englishmen , the Virginia Company did hire artisans from Prussia , the Netherlands and Poland to fill the ranks of colonists , with the hope that they would be able to produce profitable goods for the company to sell in England .
Population growth was very slow at first and depended on an increasing amount of settlers coming into Jamestown .
Besides recruiting foreign artisans , the Virginia company tried many schemes to increase settlement of the colony , including transporting " Vagrant Children " from England to Virginia and shipping young women to be married to colonists .
The Virginia Company also began to use the practice of indentured servitude , promising land at the end of the term to increase immigration to the colonies .
1619 marked the first time African slaves were brought to the colony when 20 arrived on the White Lion , a Dutch trade ship that had captured them from a Portuguese slave ship .
During the English Civil War and the Commonwealth Period of England , Virginia was a haven for cavaliers or royalists still loyal to the crown to live , known as Virginia Cavaliers .
EFFECT ON THE ECONOMY Section::::Effect on the economy .
The colonization of the south was greatly affected by the geography of the region .
Jamestown Island ( then a peninsula ) itself was chosen for its physical geographic properties .
Located inland , the peninsula offered protection from European powers as well as the James River ran deep enough in that the colonists could anchor their ships offshore , providing a simple and easy access .
Geography often had a role in playing in settlement selection in the south , with most early settlements only extending as far inland as ships or boat could easily travel .
The fall line between the Piedmont and Tidewater region is marked by settlements on where boats could not travel further due to the waterfalls and rapids common in this region .
Early colonization was marked by disaster and the failure of colonists to provide properly for themselves as well as turn a profit for the Virginia Company .
This is in part due to the misconceptions about climate in Europe .
The common belief in the " old world " had it that climates were the same at similar latitudes all across the world .
Therefore , the southern United States and Virginia , in particular , were expected to be similar in climate to Southern Spain .
Because of this , colonists and Virginia Company initially tried to cultivate such plants as mulberry trees and orange trees , which were not sustainable .
While not as prevalent a belief , some European colonial leaders argued that the warmer climates of the southern latitudes would also cause such precious metals to rise towards the surface of the earth .
Along with the stories of Spanish conquests finding " cities of gold " , the Virginia Company sent along with their initial colonists ' equipment for prospecting and mining gold .
These beliefs were shown to be wrong and equipment for agriculture and cultivation would have aided the early colonists .
Despite these initial misconceptions , the southern United States was rich geographically in particular for agricultural production .
Tobacco , rice , and indigo were the main cash crops of the south during the colonial period .
In 1612 John Rolfe introduced Tobacco into Jamestown and by 1640 England was importing 1.5 million pounds of tobacco from Virginia .
Tobacco Cultivation was extremely difficult , and simple farmers on an acre of land just could not meet the demands in England on their own .
With the introduction of African slaves in 1619 , plantations began to arise that could meet the demand in Europe .
Indigo was mainly cultivated in South Carolina beginning in 1739 , due to the efforts of Eliza Lucas Pickney , and became one of the biggest cash crops of the colony up until the end of the war .
American indigo reached its peak in 1773 when 1.1 million pounds were exported to England .
South Carolina 's swampy wetlands also made it a prime area for the cultivation of rice .
In the 1700s , the South Carolina economy was based upon the exportation of rice from its tidewater region .
The first attempts at cultivation were failures , and South Carolinian planters began to pay premiums to have slaves imported from specific regions in Africa where rice was grown .
REFERENCES