ITALY – SWITZERLAND BORDER
The border between the modern states of Switzerland and Italy extends to , from the French - Swiss - Italian tripoint at Mont Dolent in the west to the Austrian - Swiss - Italian tripoint near Piz Lad in the east .
Much of the border runs across the High Alps , rising above as it passes east of Dufourspitze , but it also descends to the lowest point in Switzerland as it passes Lago Maggiore below .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The border is a product of the Napoleonic period , established with the provisional constitution of the Helvetic Republic of 15 January 1798 , restored in 1815 .
While this border existed as a border of Switzerland from 1815 , there was only a unified Italian state to allow the existence of a " Swiss - Italian border " with the formation of the Kingdom of Italy in 1861 , it previously comprised the borders between Switzerland and the Kingdom of Sardinia , the Kingdom of Lombardy – Venetia and the province of Cisleithania of Austria - Hungary .
There remained some territorial disputes after the formation of the Kingdom of Italy , resolved in the Convenzione tra l'Italia e la Svizzera per l'accertamento della frontiera fra la Lombardia
ed
il Cantone dei Grigioni of 1863 .
Other Swiss - Italian treaties regarding the course of the border date to 1873/4 , 1936/7 and 1941 .
Since 1946 , it has remained unchanged as the border between the Italian Republic and the Swiss Confederacy , with the exception of minor corrections and exchanges of territory , such as the inclusion of the Lago di Lei barrage in Switzerland in the 1950s .
In 2008 Switzerland became part of the Schengen Area , meaning that border controls were removed along this border as of 12 December 2008 .
However , while border guards from both countries are no longer allowed to stop travellers for the sole purpose of passport checks , they can still carry out customs checks , as Switzerland is not in the EU Customs Union .
DETAILED PATH
Section::::Detailed path .
The border separates the Swiss canton of Valais from the Italian Aosta Valley and Piedmont region , the canton of Ticino from Piedmont and Lombardy , and the canton of Grisons from Lombardy and South Tyrol .
Running east from Mont Dolent , the border touches Grand Golliat and the Great St Bernard Pass and then visits a series of three - thousander peaks including Mont Velan , Mont Brulé and Tête Blanche before rising to at Dent d'Herens and to at Matterhorn , followed by Furgghorn , Breithorn , Zwillinge , Monte Rosa at , and Grenzgipfel just east of Dufourspitze at .
The border now encircles the Italian Domodossola valley , passing Gonda , Monte Leone , Bortelhorn , Helsenhorn , traversed by the Simplon Tunnel connecting Brig with Varzo , Grieshorn just south of Nufenen Pass , and forming the western border of Ticino runs across Marchhorn , Basodino , Pizzo Fiorera ,
Wandfluhhorn , Pizzo Quadro , Pizzo di Porcaresc , Pilone and descends below running across Centovalli along a stretch of the Melezza .
It rises again to Pilone peak before descending to Lago Maggiore between Brissago and Cannobio , on the left bank making landfall at Caviano and passing west of Lugano and the villages of Malcantone to Ponte Tresa at Lake Lugano .
It then forms the southernmost corner of Switzerland including Chiasso , turning north again outside of Como and now forming the eastern border of Ticino running west of Lake Como , of passing Lake Lugano again west of Lugano and touching Monte Boglia , Cima di Fojorina , Gazzirola , Cima di Cugn , Pizzo Campanile , again reaching at Pizzo Quadro between Val Mesolcina and Chiavenna , and further north to Pizzo Tambo , Splügen Pass and Piz Timun .
The Swiss - Italia border here has the peculiarity of including the reservoir of Lago di Lei in Italy but in an artificial salient including the reservoir 's dam in Switzerland .
Turning south again
it traverses Val Bregaglia at Castasegna and turns east towards Cima di Castello , now forming the northern border of the Valtellina , a territory that was lost by the Three Leagues in 1797 with the formation of the Cisalpine Republic .
Val Poschiavo remains part of Grisons , and is separated from Valtellina by the border passing just north of Tirano , turning north again along Piz Paradisin , Munt Cotschen , Piz da l'Acqua to the inclusion of Livigno in Italy .
The border now follows the southern watershed of Val Müstair , touching Piz Murtaröl , Piz Tea Fondada , Piz Schumbraida , Piz Umbrail until it reaches the pass road connecting Vinschgau with the Valtellina and Stilfserjoch .
The border now turns north for a final stretch separating Val Müstair and the Engadin from Vinschgau , South Tyrol , terminating at the Austrian - Swiss - Italian tripoint just north of Piz Lad .
ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION Section::::Illegal immigration .
In 2016 , due to increased illegal immigration from Italy into Switzerland related to the European migrant crisis , the Swiss government cracked down on the practice , establishing more stringent controls in Swiss - bound trains and deploying helicopter and drone patrols .
The government rejected calls to build a fence along the border .
In April 2017 , the Italian foreign ministry called the Swiss ambassador for " urgent talks " after Switzerland decided to close " three minor border crossings " during night hours .
REFERENCES