BLEED
FOR THIS Bleed for This is a 2016 American biographical sports film written and directed by Ben Younger and based on the life of former world champion boxer Vinny Pazienza .
The film stars Miles Teller as Pazienza , with Aaron Eckhart , Katey Sagal , Ciarán Hinds , and Ted Levine in supporting roles .
The film had its world premiere at the 43rd Annual Telluride Film Festival on September 2 , 2016 , and was released in the United States on November 18 , 2016 , by Open Road Films .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
On November 1988 , Vinny Pazienza boxes Roger Mayweather for the WBC World Light
Welterweight Title .
He arrives late to the weigh - in , as he has been riding a stationary bicycle in order to make the weight limit .
Vinny 's final weight is 140 pounds even , which qualifies him for the fight .
Instead of resting up for the fight , Vinny spends the night at a casino .
The following day , he loses to Mayweather .
At one point during the fight , Vinny is hit after the bell .
His boxing manager Lou Duva causes a scene by going after Mayweather , but is punched as a result .
Following the match , Duva tells the media that Vinny should retire from boxing .
This angers Vinny 's father Angelo ( who serves as his coach ) , and he confronts Duva .
In the ensuing argument , Vinny announces that he wants another fight , and hires Kevin Rooney as his coach .
Angelo receives confirmation that Vinny has been granted a title fight against Gilbert Dele .
Vinny wins the bout via technical knockout , which makes him the WBA World Light Middleweight champion .
Some days later , Angelo tells Vinny that he will be fighting Panamanian boxer Roberto Durán .
Vinny is pleased , and gets in a car with his friend Jimmy to get some coffee .
On the way , they are hit head - on by an oncoming car .
Jimmy is hurt , but Vinny suffers a critical neck injury .
As he regains consciousness in the hospital , the doctor informs him that he might never walk again , and will certainly never fight again .
He offers to better Vinny 's chances of walking by performing a spinal fusion .
While this would guarantee that he can walk again , it would limit movement in his neck .
Thus , boxing would be out of the question .
Against his doctor 's recommendation , Vinny opts to be fitted with a Halo , a medical device in which a circular metal brace is screwed into the skull in four spots , and propped up with four metal rods .
This would allow him to regain movement in his neck , which could allow him to box again .
Despite Vinny 's optimism , the notion is rejected by Kevin .
Disobeying his doctors ' advice , Vinny begins to work out in his basement .
He tells Kevin , who agrees to help him .
Angelo eventually catches them , and kicks Kevin out of the house .
Six months after the accident , Vinny is ready to have the halo removed .
He chooses to endure the pain of having the screws removed without taking any sedatives .
In his comeback match , it is confirmed that Vinny will fight against Durán .
The fight is held in Las Vegas , in 1990 .
In the first six rounds , Vinny is overpowered by Durán .
Then suddenly — inspired by his own tenacity — Vinny lands a good punch late in the fight .
Vinny eventually wins , via 12-round majority decision ( , , ) .
In the final scene , Vinny is interviewed by a journalist .
She asks him about the biggest lie he was ever told as a boxer .
Vinny pauses , then says the biggest lie is , " It 's not that simple " .
CAST * Miles Teller as Vincenzo " Vinny The Pazmanian Devil " Pazienza * Aaron Eckhart as Kevin Rooney * Katey Sagal as Louise Pazienza
* Ciarán Hinds as Angelo Pazienza
* Ted Levine as Lou Duva
* Jordan Gelber as Dan Duva * Daniel Sauli as Jon * Amanda Clayton as Doreen Pazienza * Christine Evangelista as Ashley ( girlfriend at first fight )
* Tina Casciani as Heather ( girlfriend Paz brings to family dinner )
* Liz Carey as Charity ( girlfriend freaked out by Halo )
* Denise Schaefer as Leigh
* Joe Jafo Carriere as Cebol Section::::Cast .
Professional boxers Peter Quillin and Edwin Rodríguez appear as fighters Roger Mayweather and Roberto Durán , respectively , while Godsmack singer Sully Erna plays a Blackjack dealer at Caesars Palace .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In September 2010 , it was announced Angelo Pizzo had signed on to write the film , with Chad A. Verdi , Noah Kraft , and Glen Ciano producing while Michael Corrente would direct the film .
In 2011 Verdi sent Kraft to meet with Martin Scorsese after an introduction from Senator Sheldon Whitehouse .
Mr. Scorsese agreed to partner with Verdi and Kraft on the project and signed on as an executive producer .
In 2012 , Verdi and Kraft hired Ben Younger to write and direct the feature .
In September 2014 , it was announced that Miles Teller , Aaron Eckhart , Amanda Clayton , Ciarán Hinds , and Katey Sagal had joined the cast of the film , with Ben Younger directing from a screenplay he wrote , while Scorsese and Emma Koskoff Tillinger , Bruce Cohen and Pamela Thur - Weir serving as producers .
In December 2014 , Tina Casciani joined the cast of the film .
Aaron Eckhart gained a reported 45 pounds for the role of Kevin Rooney .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
on November 10 , 2014 , in Warwick , Rhode Island .
On December 10 , filming took place at Twin River Casino in Lincoln , Rhode Island .
On December 16 and 17 , filming took place at Dunkin ' Donuts Center in Providence .
LAWSUIT
Section::::Lawsuit .
On July 27 , 2017 , Vinny Paz filed a formal lawsuit against filmmakers Ben Younger and Chad A. Verdi , citing forgery and failure to pay $ 175,000 of the promised $ 300,000 payout for the rights to his life 's story .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
In February 2015 , the first image of Teller was released .
In May 2015 , Open Road Films acquired distribution rights to the film .
The film had its world premiere at the 43rd Annual Telluride Film Festival on September 2 , 2016 , before screening at the 2016 Toronto International Film Festival .
Originally , the film was scheduled to open in a limited release on November 4 , 2016 , before opening wide on November 23 .
In October 2016 , the film was rescheduled to have a wide opening on November 18 , 2016 , forgoing a limited release .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
Bleed for This opened alongside Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them and The Edge of Seventeen , as well as the wide expansions of Moonlight and Billy Lynn 's Long Halftime Walk , and was initially expected to gross around $ 5 million from 1,549 theaters .
After grossing less than $ 900,000 on its opening day expectations were lowered to $ 2–3 million ; it ended up debuting to $ 2.4 million , finishing 8th at the box office .
In its second weekend the film dropped to 17th at the box office , grossing $ 949,898 ( a drop of 59 % ) .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes the film holds an approval rating of 71 % based on 113 reviews , with an average rating of 6.3/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Bleed for This rises on the strength of Miles Teller 's starring performance to deliver a solid fact - based boxing drama that takes a few genre clichés on the chin but keeps on coming . "
Metacritic gives the film a normalized score of 62 out of 100 , based on 34 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A – " on an A+ to F scale .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS