AVENGERS :
INFINITY WAR Avengers : Infinity War is a 2018 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics superhero team the Avengers , produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures .
It is the sequel to 2012 's The Avengers and 2015 's , and the nineteenth film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe ( MCU ) .
The film is directed by Anthony and Joe Russo , written by Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely , and features an ensemble cast including Robert Downey Jr. , Chris Hemsworth , Mark Ruffalo , Chris Evans , Scarlett Johansson , Benedict Cumberbatch , Don Cheadle , Tom Holland , Chadwick Boseman , Paul Bettany , Elizabeth Olsen , Anthony Mackie , Sebastian Stan , Danai Gurira , Letitia Wright , Dave Bautista , Zoe Saldana , Josh Brolin , and Chris Pratt .
In the film , the Avengers and the Guardians of the Galaxy attempt to stop Thanos from amassing the all - powerful Infinity Stones .
The film was announced in October 2014 as Avengers : Infinity War – Part 1 .
The Russo brothers came on board to direct in April 2015 and by May , Markus and McFeely had signed on to write the script for the film , which drew inspiration from Jim Starlin 's 1991 The Infinity Gauntlet comic and Jonathan Hickman 's 2013 Infinity comic .
In 2016 , Marvel shortened the title to Avengers : Infinity War .
Filming began in January 2017 at Pinewood Atlanta Studios in Fayette County , Georgia , with a large cast consisting mostly of actors reprising their roles from previous MCU films , including Brolin as Thanos .
The production lasted until July 2017 , shooting back - to - back with a direct sequel , .
Additional filming took place in Scotland , England , the Downtown Atlanta area , and New York City .
With an estimated budget in the range of $ 316–400 million , it is one of the most expensive films ever made .
Avengers :
Infinity War held its world premiere on April 23 , 2018 in Los Angeles and was released in the United States on April 27 , 2018 , in IMAX and 3D.
The film received praise for the performances of the cast ( particularly Brolin 's ) and the emotional weight of the story , as well as the visual effects and action sequences .
It was the fourth film and the first superhero film to gross over $ 2 billion worldwide , breaking numerous and becoming the highest - grossing film of 2018 , as well as the fourth - highest - grossing film of all time and in the United States and Canada .
The sequel , Avengers : Endgame , is set to be released on April 26 , 2019 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Having acquired the Power Stone , one of the six Infinity Stones , from the planet Xandar , Thanos and his lieutenants — Ebony Maw , Cull Obsidian , Proxima Midnight , and Corvus Glaive — intercept a spaceship carrying the last survivors of Asgard .
As they extract the Space Stone from the Tesseract , Thanos subdues Thor , overpowers Hulk , and kills Loki .
Heimdall sends Hulk to Earth using the Bifröst before being killed .
Thanos departs with his lieutenants and obliterates the ship .
Hulk crash - lands at the Sanctum Sanctorum in New York City , reverting to Bruce Banner .
He warns Stephen Strange and Wong about Thanos ' plan to kill half of all life in the universe ; in response , Strange recruits Tony Stark .
Maw and Obsidian arrive to retrieve the Time Stone from Strange , drawing the attention of Peter Parker .
Maw captures Strange , but fails to take the Time Stone due to an enchantment .
Stark and Parker pursue Maw 's spaceship , Banner contacts Steve Rogers , and Wong stays behind to guard the Sanctum .
In Edinburgh , Midnight and Glaive ambush Wanda Maximoff and Vision in order to retrieve the Mind Stone in Vision 's forehead .
Rogers , Natasha Romanoff , and Sam Wilson rescue them and take shelter with James Rhodes and Banner at the Avengers Facility .
Vision offers to sacrifice himself by having Maximoff destroy the Mind Stone to keep Thanos from retrieving it .
Rogers suggests they travel to Wakanda , which he believes has the resources to remove the stone without destroying Vision .
The Guardians of the Galaxy respond to a distress call from the Asgardian ship and rescue Thor , who surmises Thanos seeks the Reality Stone , which is in the possession of the Collector on Knowhere .
Rocket and Groot accompany Thor to Nidavellir , where they and Eitri create Stormbreaker , a battle - axe capable of killing Thanos .
On Knowhere , Peter Quill , Gamora , Drax , and Mantis find Thanos with the Reality Stone already in his possession .
Thanos kidnaps Gamora , his adopted daughter , who reveals the location of the Soul Stone to save her captive adopted sister Nebula from torture .
Thanos and Gamora travel to Vormir , where Red Skull , keeper of the Soul Stone , informs him the stone can only be retrieved by sacrificing someone he loves .
Thanos reluctantly kills Gamora , earning the stone .
Nebula escapes captivity and asks the remaining Guardians to meet her on Thanos ' destroyed homeworld , Titan .
Stark and Parker kill Maw and rescue Strange .
Landing on Titan , they meet Quill , Drax , and Mantis .
The group forms a plan to remove Thanos ' Infinity Gauntlet after Strange uses the Time Stone to view millions of possible futures , seeing only one in which Thanos loses .
Thanos arrives , justifying his plans as necessary to ensure the survival of a universe threatened by overpopulation .
The group subdues him until Nebula deduces that Thanos has killed Gamora .
Enraged , Quill attacks him , allowing Thanos to break the group 's hold and overpower them .
Stark is seriously wounded by Thanos , but is spared after Strange surrenders the Time Stone .
In Wakanda , Rogers reunites with Bucky Barnes before Thanos ' army invades .
The Avengers , alongside T'Challa and the Wakandan forces , mount a defense while Shuri works to extract the Mind Stone from Vision .
Banner , unable to transform into the Hulk , fights in Stark 's Hulkbuster armor .
Thor , Rocket , and Groot arrive to reinforce the Avengers ; Midnight , Obsidian , and Glaive are killed and their army is routed .
Thanos arrives and despite Maximoff 's attempt to destroy the Mind Stone , removes it from Vision 's head , killing him .
Thor severely wounds Thanos , but Thanos activates the completed Infinity Gauntlet and teleports away .
Half of all life across the universe disintegrates , including Barnes , T'Challa , Groot , Maximoff , Wilson , Mantis , Drax , Quill , Strange , and Parker , as well as Maria Hill and Nick Fury , although Fury is able to transmit a signal first .
Stark and Nebula remain on Titan while Banner , M'Baku , Okoye , Rhodes , Rocket , Rogers , Romanoff , and Thor are left on the Wakandan battlefield .
Meanwhile , Thanos watches a sunrise on another planet .
CAST
* Robert Downey Jr. as Tony Stark / Iron Man :
* Chris Hemsworth as Thor :
* Mark Ruffalo as Bruce Banner
/ Hulk :
* Chris Evans as Steve Rogers / Captain America :
* Scarlett Johansson as Natasha Romanoff / Black Widow :
* Benedict Cumberbatch as Dr. Stephen Strange :
* Don Cheadle as James " Rhodey " Rhodes / War Machine :
* Tom Holland as Peter Parker / Spider - Man : * Chadwick Boseman as T'Challa / Black Panther : * Paul Bettany as Vision : * Elizabeth Olsen as Wanda Maximoff / Scarlet Witch : A member of Rogers ' faction of Avengers , who can harness magic and engage in hypnosis and telekinesis .
* Anthony Mackie as Sam Wilson
/ Falcon : * Sebastian Stan as Bucky Barnes / Winter Soldier : * Tom Hiddleston as Loki :
Thor 's adopted brother , based on the Norse mythological deity of the same name .
* Idris Elba as Heimdall :
The all - seeing , all - hearing Asgardian former sentry of the Bifröst Bridge , based on the Norse mythological deity of the same name .
* Peter Dinklage as Eitri : King of the Dwarves of Nidavellir , and weaponsmith , based on the Norse mythological dwarf of the same name .
* Benedict Wong as Wong : One of the Masters of the Mystic Arts , tasked with protecting some of Kamar - Taj 's most valuable relics and books .
* Pom Klementieff as Mantis : A member of the Guardians of the Galaxy with empathic powers .
* Karen Gillan as Nebula :
An adopted daughter of Thanos who was raised with Gamora as siblings .
* Dave Bautista as Drax the Destroyer :
* Zoe Saldana as Gamora : A member of the Guardians , who is an orphan from an alien world and raised by Thanos , seeking redemption for her past crimes .
Ariana Greenblatt portrays a young Gamora .
* Vin Diesel as Groot : * Bradley Cooper as Rocket :
* Gwyneth Paltrow as Pepper Potts :
* Benicio del Toro as Taneleer Tivan /
The Collector : One of the Elders of the Universe , who is an obsessive keeper of the largest collection of interstellar fauna , relics , and species of all manner in the galaxy .
* Josh Brolin as Thanos :
* Chris Pratt as Peter Quill / Star - Lord : Section::::Cast .
Additionally , several other actors reprise their MCU roles :
Danai Gurira as Okoye , the head of the Dora Milaje ; Letitia Wright as T'Challa 's sister Shuri ; William Hurt as Thaddeus Ross , the U.S. Secretary of State ; Kerry Condon as the voice of Stark 's A.I. F.R.I.D.A.Y. ; Winston Duke as M'Baku , the leader of Wakanda 's mountain tribe the Jabari ; Florence Kasumba as Ayo , a member of the Dora Milaje ; Jacob Batalon as Parker 's friend Ned ; Isabella Amara as Parker 's classmate Sally ; Tiffany Espensen as Parker 's classmate Cindy ; and Ethan Dizon as Parker 's classmate Tiny .
Samuel L. Jackson and Cobie Smulders make uncredited cameos as Nick Fury and Maria Hill , the former director and deputy director of S.H.I.E.L.D , respectively , in the film 's post - credits scene .
Thanos ' henchmen , known collectively in the comics as the Black Order and in the film as the " Children of Thanos " , include Terry Notary as Cull Obsidian , Tom Vaughan - Lawlor as Ebony Maw , Carrie Coon as Proxima Midnight , and Michael James Shaw as Corvus Glaive .
The foursome provided voices and motion - capture performances on set for their characters .
As Coon was pregnant during filming , she mainly did facial capture for Proxima Midnight with some motion - capture , with stuntwoman Monique Ganderton standing - in and providing the rest on set .
Ebony Maw 's look was inspired by the Marvel Comics character Mephisto , who appeared in the Infinity Gauntlet storyline .
Ross Marquand portrays Johann Schmidt / Red Skull , the " Stonekeeper " and former Nazi commander of Hydra during World War II .
Marquand replaces Hugo Weaving , who had expressed reluctance to reprise the character from ( 2011 ) .
Avengers co - creator Stan Lee makes a cameo appearance in the film as Parker 's school bus driver , while screenwriter Stephen McFeely cameos as Secretary Ross 's aide .
Kenneth Branagh , the director of Thor ( 2011 ) , voices an Asgardian distress caller in an uncredited cameo .
David Cross was invited to make a cameo appearance as Tobias Fünke , his character from the television sitcom Arrested Development , which the Russo brothers had previously worked on ; this was prevented by a scheduling conflict , but Fünke still appears in the film as a specimen in the Collector 's collection , played by an uncredited extra .
Jon Favreau was to reprise his role as Happy Hogan , while co - director Joe Russo had a cameo appearance as a paparazzi photographer , but this scene did not make the theatrical cut of the film .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In October 2014 , Marvel announced a two - part sequel to ( 2015 ) , titled Avengers : Infinity War .
Part 1 was scheduled to be released on May 4 , 2018 , with Part 2 scheduled for May 3 , 2019 .
In April 2015 , Marvel announced that Anthony and Joe Russo would direct both parts of Avengers : Infinity War , with back - to - back filming expected to begin in 2016 .
The next month , Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely had signed on to write the screenplays for both parts of the film , which draws inspiration from Jim Starlin 's 1991 " The Infinity Gauntlet " comic and Jonathan Hickman 's 2013 " Infinity " comic .
Anthony Russo added the film was inspired by 1990s heist films , with Thanos " on a smash - and - grab [ to acquire the Infinity Stones ] , and everybody 's trying to catch up the whole movie " .
Producer Kevin Feige said that the Infinity War films were subtitled Part 1 and Part 2 " because they [ have ] such shared elements , it felt appropriate ...
But I would n't call it one story that 's cut in half .
I would say it 's going to be two distinct movies . "
In May 2016 , the Russos revealed that they would retitle the two films , to further remove the misconception that they were one large film split in two , with Joe stating , "
The intention is we will change [ the titles ] , we just have n't come up with [ them ] yet . "
That July , Marvel revealed Part 1s title would be shortened to simply Avengers : Infinity War .
Principal photography began on January 23 , 2017 , under the working title Mary Lou , at Pinewood Atlanta Studios in Fayette County , Georgia , with Trent Opaloch as director of photography .
Infinity War , along with , were shot using IMAX / Arri 2D cameras , thus marking the first time that a Hollywood feature film was shot entirely with IMAX digital cameras .
In early February , Marvel confirmed the involvement of Robert Downey Jr. as Tony Stark / Iron Man , Chris Pratt as Peter Quill / Star - Lord , and Tom Holland as Peter Parker / Spider - Man in the film .
Additional filming took place in Scotland beginning in February 2017 .
The filming occurred in Edinburgh , Glasgow and the Scottish Highlands , with studio work taking place at Wardpark Studios in Cumbernauld .
Filming also began at Durham Cathedral in Durham , England in early May 2017 .
In late June 2017 , filming occurred in Downtown Atlanta , as well as Atlanta 's Central Park in early July , before moving to Queens , New York in the middle of the month .
Filming concluded on July 14 , 2017 .
For the film 's final scene , where Thanos emerges healed in a nipa hut , the filmmakers partnered with Indochina Productions , a studio based in Thailand , to acquire footage of the Banaue Rice Terraces at Ifugao , Philippines .
Later in July 2017 , Joe Russo stated there were a couple of unfinished scenes for Infinity War that would be shot " in the next few months " .
In early March 2018 , Disney moved the release of Infinity War in the United States to April 27 , 2018 , to have it be released the same weekend as some of its international markets .
Visual effects for the film were created by Industrial Light & Magic , Framestore , Method Studios , Weta Digital , DNEG , Cinesite , Digital Domain , Rise , Lola VFX , and Perception .
With an estimated budget in the range of $ 316–400 million , it is one of the most expensive films ever made .
Evans and Hemsworth both earned $ 15 million for the film .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
In June 2016 , Alan Silvestri , who composed the score for The Avengers ( 2012 ) , was revealed to be returning to score both Infinity War and Endgame .
Silvestri started to record his score in January 2018 , and concluded in late March .
Silvestri felt working on the film " was a really different experience than anything I 'd done before , especially in regard to the approach and balancing quick shifts in tone " .
Ludwig Göransson 's theme from Black Panther is also used in the film .
Hollywood Records and Marvel Music released the soundtrack album digitally on April 27 , 2018 , with a release on physical formats following on May 18 .
Two versions were released , a regular and deluxe edition , with the deluxe edition featuring some extended and additional tracks .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
In May 2017 , Robert Downey Jr. and his philanthropic organization Random Act Funding partnered with Omaze to initiate a contest to benefit the organization .
A randomly chosen winner from those that donated would receive an Infinity War set visit .
A life - sized statue of Thanos , created by Legacy Effects , was on display at D23 Expo 2017 , alongside statues of the Black Order /
" Children of Thanos " : Corvus Glaive , Proxima Midnight , Ebony Maw , and Cull Obsidian .
Additionally , Feige , Joe Russo , Downey , Brolin , Bettany , Olsen , Klementieff , Gillan , Bautista , Cheadle , Mackie , Cumberbatch , Stan , Holland , Boseman , Ruffalo , and Hemsworth appeared at D23 Expo to present a clip highlighting the 10 years of MCU films , along with footage from Infinity War .
The footage , which was screened exclusively for the panel , received strong audience reaction , with fans " literally on their feet and jumping as the footage played " .
Julia Alexander of Polygon commented , " to say that there was quite a bit happening in the trailer would be one hell of an understatement . "
She was excited that the film would deliver on the character interactions in one film and that Infinity War " finally feels like Marvel has made the movie it always wanted to — and the one we 've always wanted to see .
For nearly ten years we dreamt of this reality and to see it play across a massive screen ...
it was impossible to not feel emotional .
"
CinemaBlend 's Eric Eisenberg said the footage left him " literally shaking " , with the film looking " like it could be one of the most epic blockbusters ever created " , concluding " the hype [ for the film ] most definitely feels very , very real " .
Haleigh Foutch for Collider said , " It looks dark and dramatic , and utterly epic .
It 's clear Marvel is trying to do something different here ... to pay off a decade 's worth of narrative and world - building .
While it 's impossible to tell from two minutes work of footage , it certainly looks like that gamble paid off .
"
The D23 footage was also shown at the 2017 San Diego Comic - Con International .
Due to the two convention presentations , Avengers : Infinity War generated over 90,000 new conversations on social media from July 17 to 23 , the third - most during that time period behind Thor :
Ragnarok and Justice League ( 2017 ) ,
according to comScore and its PreAct service .
Infinity War stayed in third the following week , with over 41,000 new social media conversations , behind Ragnarok and It ( 2017 ) .
By the week of October 16 , Infinity War had generated over 679,000 total social media conversations .
To promote the release of the film 's first trailer , Marvel released " a retrospective video looking back at some of its best trailers " since Iron Man ( 2008 ) , " paired with fan reaction videos to those trailers " .
The first trailer for Avengers : Infinity War debuted on Good Morning America on November 29 , 2017 .
Josh Spiegel of The Hollywood Reporter said , " The trailer promises , in many ways , exactly what anyone with a passing familiarity with superhero movies would expect ... " but " the most important part of the trailer is how it carefully , deliberately introduces the notion that the Infinity War films are going to function as a passing of the torch , from one set of Avengers to a newer group . "
Scott Mendelson , writing for Forbes , noted that even though the trailer was not much different from the convention footage screened earlier in the year , it was " damn impressive .
Moreover , it uses Nick Fury 's big ' Avengers Initiative ' speech , along with Alan Silvestri 's Avengers theme , to excellent effect . "
Conversely to Mendelson , Alexander commented on the different marketing strategy for the film between the convention footage scenes and the trailer scenes , feeling the " two could n't be more different " .
She noted how the convention footage ( " meant to please a crowd running on little sleep and jittery with anticipation " ) was released between Guardians of the Galaxy Vol .
2 ( 2017 ) and Thor : Ragnarok , and " [ i]t made sense to use Thor and the Guardians to hype up [ Infinity War ] " because " Marvel relied on the anticipation of Thor : Ragnarok and Guardians of the Galaxy Vol .
2s success to excite fans , and footage of older movies set to classic Marvel scores as a way to drive home how this movie is an event in itself . "
Conversely , the trailer ( " designed to explain what 's about to happen , teasing it out with additional background " )
heavily featured Black Panther and Wakanda , which Alexander said could not have been done earlier , without the additional marketing for Black Panther that happened after the conventions to provide additional context .
Gael Cooper of CNET observed that the trailer was viewed nearly 500,000 times in its first 15 minutes after it was posted on YouTube , but questioned if the trailer broke the site after the view counter appeared to be stuck at 467,331 .
The trailer was viewed 230 million times in its first 24 hours , becoming the most viewed trailer in that time period , surpassing the record of It .
In January 2018 , Marvel Comics published a two - issue prequel comic titled Avengers : Infinity War Prelude , which serves as a bridge between Captain America : Civil War and Avengers : Infinity War .
A commercial for Infinity War aired during Super Bowl LII .
The ad generated the most social media buzz out of all the films advertised during the Super Bowl , according to comScore and United Talent Agency ; it was viewed 17.6 million times across YouTube and Facebook .
On February 27 , 2018 , Disney and Marvel announced the Marvel : The Universe Unites charity campaign leading to the release of merchandise for the film on March 3 .
The week - long event saw stars from the film create social media challenges to provide funds and raise awareness for charities that support children and families impacted by serious illness .
If their collective posts reached 1 million likes , Marvel said they would make a $ 250,000 donation to Starlight Children 's Foundation .
Additionally , Disney planned to donate 10 % of sales of all Marvel products purchased at Disney Stores in the United States and online on the weekend of March 3 to the Make - A - Wish Foundation , up to $ 50,000 .
Hasbro donated $ 1 million worth of cash and products to Give Kids the World Village and Funko made a $ 1 million toy donation to Starlight .
A second trailer was released on March 16 , 2018 , which earned over 1 million views on YouTube in less than three hours after it was released .
Alyssa Rosenberg of The Washington Post was not overly enthused about another superhero film having " special - effects - heavy villains , or the sight of yet mysterious object hanging over the Manhattan skyline " , but felt the trailer made her realize " that I 'm actually looking forward to seeing [ the characters of the MCU ] get to know each other " .
Spiegel agreed with Rosenberg about the potential for character interactions , noting the trailer " suggests that some of these meetings are going to keep up the playful tone of recent MCU movies " .
While conceding it was " gimmicky " to have so many " crossover - style introductions or combinations of heroes in a movie like this " , he noted " the entire Marvel Cinematic Universe is built on a foundation of these heroes existing within the same space , so their eventual meetings have a level of anticipation that exceeds that of watching them face off against Thanos .
" The second trailer was viewed 179 million times in the first 24 hours , the third - most viewed trailer in that time period , behind the first trailer for the film and It , while also becoming the biggest release for a second trailer , surpassing Beauty and the Beast ( 2017 ) ( 128 million views ) .
A week before the film 's release , the Burj Khalifa in Dubai was lit up each night for the film , counting down to its release .
Marvel also featured tie - in events across seven of their mobile games to promote the film .
In early May 2018 , Marvel and Epic Games announced the " Infinity Gauntlet Limited Time Mashup " mode for Fortnite Battle Royale , where players could find the Infinity Gauntlet hidden on the game map and become Thanos with added abilities .
The Russo brothers were fans of Fortnite and approached Donald Mustard , the worldwide creative director of Epic Games , about the potential for a crossover between the properties .
On November 20 , 2018 , Little , Brown and Company published Marvel 's Avengers : Infinity War : Thanos – Titan Consumed , written by Barry Lyga .
Despite not existing within Marvel Studios ' MCU canon , the novel explores the origins of Thanos before the events of the film .
Lyga noted he spoke with Marvel Studios to get an " outline of who Thanos is and what he means to the movies " , and " was given great latitude and a free hand [ in some areas of the story ] , while in others I had to tip - toe very carefully through the MCU " .
Additional marketing partners for the film included Coca - Cola , Quicken Loans and their Rocket Mortgage service , the Infiniti QX50 ( which is also featured in the film ) , Ziploc , Go - Gurt , Yoplait , Synchrony Bank , American Airlines , and Stand Up to Cancer .
The partners created television commercials " inspired by or featuring the film 's characters and themes " , interactive digital initiatives , and robust in - store presences at numerous retailers .
Duracell , Unilever , Quaker Oats Company , Chevron , and Samsung ran promotions in smaller markets .
Coca - Cola , Ziploc , Go - Gurt , and Yoplait created special packaging in support of the film , with Synchrony implementing a " Save Like a Hero " campaign , and Stand Up to Cancer and American Airlines launching a national campaign with a PSA starring Johansson and Hemsworth .
In the United Kingdom , OnePlus released an Infinity War edition for one of their smartphones .
Deadline Hollywood estimated the media value was $ 150 million , the largest for any Marvel film , with Coca - Cola contributing an estimated $ 40 million .
RELEASE
THEATRICAL Section::::Release .
Section::::Theatrical .
Avengers :
Infinity War held its world premiere at the Dolby Theatre in Los Angeles on April 23 , 2018 , screening also at the adjacent El Capitan Theatre and Grauman 's Chinese Theatre .
It was released in most countries worldwide , including the United States , on April 27 , 2018 , with a few debuts beginning as early as April 25 , and was shown in IMAX and 3D on select screens .
In the United States , the film opened in 4,474 theaters , 408 of which were IMAX ; this was the widest release for a Disney title ever and the second - widest ever after Despicable Me 3s 4,529 theaters .
Three of AMC Theatres ' locations screened the film for 24 hours straight , with 53 of their locations having showtimes at either 2 am or 3 am to accommodate demand .
In India , the film had the biggest release ever for a Hollywood film , opening on nearly 2,000 screens in four languages .
The film also screened in 515 4DX theaters in 59 countries .
Avengers :
Infinity War was originally scheduled to be released on May 4 , 2018 in the United States .
The Chinese release of the film , which opened on May 11 , 2018 , was originally scheduled to end on June 10 , 2018 , but was granted a " rare " extension of 30 days , to end on July 9 , 2018 .
Select footage from the film was screened around various cities during the film 's press tour in early April , ahead of the film 's Los Angeles premiere .
The Russos noted that only a limited amount of the film would be shown at these screenings to reduce the chance of spoilers being leaked .
Adam Chitwood of Collider commented that this was " highly unusual as most Marvel movies are screened in their entirety for press about a month before they hit theaters " .
Ahead of the United States release , AMC Theatres in New York City and Orlando , Florida aired an eleven - MCU film marathon beginning on April 25 , leading to a screening of Infinity War .
The El Capitan Theatre in Los Angeles also had a similar marathon ahead of the film 's release .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Avengers :
Infinity War was released on digital download by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on July 31 , 2018 , and on Ultra HD Blu - ray , Blu - ray , and DVD on August 14 .
The digital and Blu - ray releases include behind - the - scenes featurettes , audio commentary , deleted scenes , and a blooper reel .
The digital release also features a roundtable discussion between MCU directors the Russos , Jon Favreau , Joss Whedon , James Gunn , Ryan Coogler , Peyton Reed , and Taika Waititi .
In terms of home media sales , the physical versions of the film were collectively the top home media release of the week in which they were first released .
Despite being shot with IMAX cameras and releasing in IMAX theaters in that aspect ratio , the IMAX version of the film was not released on the home media , instead including a cropped 2.39:1 aspect ratio .
Joe Russo said they " spent a long time trying to " have the IMAX version on the home media , but since the IMAX Corporation has " agency over that format " , the situation was " complicated " .
He did not rule out the possibility that this version could be available at a later point .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Avengers : Infinity War grossed $ 678.8 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 1.369 billion in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 2.048 billion .
It became the fourth highest - grossing film of all time , as well as the highest - grossing film of 2018 , the highest - grossing MCU film , and the highest - grossing superhero film .
Its worldwide opening weekend of $ 640.5 million is the biggest of all time , beating The Fate of the Furious ( 2017 ) $ 541.9 million .
It was the fastest film to make $ 1 billion at the worldwide box office , doing so in 11 days to eclipse ( 2015 ) record of 12 days .
Also in its second weekend , Infinity War passed $ 13.5 million from 4DX screens , which was the all - time record for the format .
On June 12 , 2018 , Avengers : Infinity War passed the $ 2 billion mark at the worldwide box office , becoming the fourth film to cross that milestone after Avatar ( 2009 ) , Titanic ( 1997 ) , and The Force Awakens .
Crossing the mark in 48 days was the second fastest to that point , after Avatars 47-day record .
With $ 140 million worldwide from IMAX , the film is the third - largest worldwide in the format , behind Avatar and The Force Awakens , and the largest for a Marvel film .
In May 2018 , two weeks after its release , Deadline Hollywood deduced the film had already broken even and estimated its net profit would be around $ 600 million .
This value took into account production budgets , P&A , talent participations , and other costs , with box office grosses and ancillary revenues from home media .
PRE - SALE TICKET
RECORDS Section::::Pre - sale ticket records .
In December 2017 , a survey from Fandango indicated that Infinity War was the most anticipated film of 2018 .
Fandango later reported that Infinity War achieved the largest initial 24-hour ticket pre - sales for a superhero film , taking just 6 hours to surpass the previous 24-hour record set by Black Panther .
Atom Tickets reported that Infinity War sold more tickets in its first pre - sales day than Black Panther sold in its first month .
Within 72 hours , the film generated the largest pre - sales for any superhero film at AMC Theatres , with its advance ticket sales being 257.6 % ahead of Black Panthers , 751.5 % ahead of Captain America : Civil War , and 1,106.5 % ahead of Avengers : Age of Ultron during the same time frame .
Two weeks before its release , Fandango revealed that advance ticket sales for Infinity War were outpacing the last seven MCU films combined in the same timeframe , and had become the company 's top April release .
It was also on pace to become the top superhero film .
A week before the film released , The Wall Street Journal said the film had sold more than $ 50 million worth of advance tickets , behind only The Force Awakens and ( 2017 ) , with Fandango reporting that more than 2,500 showtimes had sold out .
On Atom Tickets , Infinity War had the most pre - sale volume , selling 7 % higher than The Last Jedi and 250 % higher than Black Panther at the same point in their sales .
Atom also reported that ticket sales for Infinity War were doubling daily the week of its release , the fastest rate of increase the service has seen for any MCU title .
UNITED STATES AND CANADA Section::::United States and Canada .
Avengers :
Infinity War earned $ 106.7 million on its opening day in the United States and Canada ( including $ 39 million from Thursday night previews ) , for an opening weekend total of $ 258.2 million .
The Thursday night preview earning was the best for an MCU film ( beating Avengers : Age of Ultrons $ 27.6 million ) and the fourth - best of all time , behind The Force Awakens ( $ 57 million ) , The Last Jedi ( $ 45 million ) and Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 ( 2011 ) ( $ 43.5 million ) .
Fandango reported that $ 14 million of the $ 39 million came from ticket pre - sales from the company .
The opening day gross was the second - best ever , behind The Force Awakens $ 119.1 million ; its Saturday gross of $ 83 million was the best - ever Saturday gross , beating Jurassic Worlds ( 2015 ) $ 69.6 million ; and its Sunday gross of $ 69.2 million was the best - ever , beating The Force Awakens $ 60.5 million .
The total weekend gross became the highest - grossing opening weekend , beating The Force Awakens $ 248 million .
IMAX contributed $ 22.5 million to the opening weekend gross , which was the best opening for a Marvel film in the format and the third - biggest opening , behind The Force Awakens ( $ 30 million ) and The Last Jedi ( $ 24.7 million ) .
AMC reported that the film had the highest Friday and Saturday box office gross for a single title in the company 's history , while Fandango reported that approximately $ 84 million worth of tickets were sold through the service , approximately 30 % , which was the largest share of the weekend box office for any film in the company 's history .
Avengers :
Infinity War earned an additional $ 25 million the Monday after its opening weekend , which was the highest grossing Monday in April , beating Furious 7 ( 2015 ) ( $ 14 million ) , and the second - best Monday gross for an MCU film , after Black Panther ( $ 40.1 million ) .
The next day , it earned $ 23.5 million , which was the highest grossing Tuesday for an MCU film , beating Black Panther ( $ 20.8 million ) , and the highest grossing Tuesday in May , beating The Avengers ( $ 17.6 million ) .
It also tied The Force Awakens for the fastest to reach $ 300 million at five days .
The film remained number one in its second weekend , earning $ 115.5 million , which was the second - best second weekend ever after The Force Awakens ( $ 149.2 million ) .
Infinity War also surpassed $ 400 million in the weekend , doing so in nine days , becoming the second fastest film to reach that mark , again after The Force Awakenss eight days .
In its third weekend , Infinity War remained number one at the box office , and became the second - fastest film to surpass $ 500 million , doing so in 15 days ( behind The Force Awakenss 10 days ) .
The weekend also saw its total domestic IMAX gross become $ 48.1 million , which was the highest for any MCU film .
The film 's fourth weekend saw it come in second , behind Deadpool 2 , and in its fifth it finished third behind and Deadpool 2 .
By May 23 , Infinity War surpassed $ 600 million , becoming the second - fastest film to do so in 26 days , after The Force Awakens ( 12 days ) .
It remained in the top ten through its ninth weekend .
In the United States and Canada , it went on to become the fourth highest - grossing film of all time , and the second highest - grossing superhero film , behind Black Panther .
OTHER TERRITORIES
Section::::Other territories .
Outside the United States and Canada , the film earned $ 382.7 million from 52 markets , opening number one in all , and became the number two opening internationally , behind The Fate of the Furious ( $ 444.2 million ) .
IMAX contributed $ 18.5 million , which was the best opening outside of the US , Canada , and China , surpassing The Force Awakens ( $ 17.5 million ) .
All - time opening weekend records were set in South Korea ( $ 39.2 million ) , Mexico ( $ 25.4 million ) , Brazil ( $ 19.1 million ) , India ( for a Western release , $ 18.6 million ) , the Philippines ( $ 12.5 million ) , Thailand ( $ 10 million ) , Indonesia ( $ 9.6 million ) , Malaysia , Hong Kong , Vietnam , Central America , Peru , Chile , Ecuador , Venezuela , Bolivia , South Africa , Turkey , the United Arab Emirates , and West Africa , with many also setting opening day records .
France had the biggest superhero opening in the market with $ 17.7 million , as did Denmark , Finland , Norway , Portugal , and Sweden .
The United Kingdom earned $ 8.9 million , which was the biggest MCU opening day and third highest opening day for a Disney film ; it would go on to earn $ 41.4 million for the weekend , which was the third - highest of all time and the second - highest Disney opening .
Argentina had the second highest opening day of all time , while Germany had the best superhero film opening day of all time , ultimately earning $ 14.7 million , which was the best superhero opening ever .
Many other European countries and the Middle East also broke superhero film records .
Japan had the second - biggest opening for an MCU film with $ 9 million , and Australia had the second - highest opening weekend ever , with $ 23.2 million .
Avengers :
Infinity War remained number one in its 54 markets in its second weekend .
The $ 4.9 million opening day in Russia was the biggest of all time .
Infinity War was also the first film in Russia to sell more than 1 million tickets in a single day , and went on to gross $ 17.6 million in the market , a new opening weekend record .
IMAX contributed $ 2.2 million in the market , which was also an opening weekend record .
In its third weekend , the film remained number one in a majority of its markets .
Infinity War opened in China to $ 200 million ( RMB 1.266 billion ) , which was the second highest opening weekend in local currency behind The Fate of the Furious ( $ 184 million and RMB 1.352 million ) .
IMAX contributed $ 20.5 million , which was the third - largest opening in China .
Infinity War also broke China 's pre - sale record of 400 million yuan ( $ 63 million ) .
In India , Infinity War became the first Hollywood film to earn over ₹2 billion net ( $ 29.7 million ) , and also became the highest grossing MCU film in the United Kingdom .
In its sixth weekend , the film became the highest grossing MCU film in Japan with $ 33 million .
The film became the highest grossing release ever in Brazil , Indonesia , the Philippines , Central America , Bolivia , Venezuela , Latin America as a region , Mexico , Chile , Ecuador , Peru , Malaysia , Singapore , India ( for a Western release ) , Vietnam , Indonesia , Thailand ( for a Western release ) , and Mongolia , the second - highest in the Asia - Pacific region ( for a Western release ) , Hong Kong , and South Korea ( for a Western release ) , and the third - highest in China ( for a Western release ) .
It is also the highest - grossing superhero film in many European countries , including the United Kingdom .
, the film 's top markets are China ( $ 373.4 million ) , the United Kingdom ( $ 95.7 million ) , and South Korea ( $ 92.8 million ) .
The film is the third highest - grossing film of all time in territories outside the United States and Canada .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported an 84 % approval rating based on 401 reviews , and an average rating of 7.5/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Avengers :
Infinity War ably juggles a dizzying array of MCU heroes in the fight against their gravest threat yet , and the result is a thrilling , emotionally resonant blockbuster that ( mostly ) realizes its gargantuan ambitions .
" Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned the film a score of 68 out of 100 , based on 53 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A " on an A+ to F scale , while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave it an 87 % overall positive score and a 68 % " definite recommend " .
Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter praised the writers ' and directors ' ability to balance the large cast of characters , saying , " ... writers Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely and directors Anthony and Joe Russo , under the supervision of Marvel Films maestro Kevin Feige , acknowledge the traffic jam of egos and play it for laughs " .
Owen Gleiberman of Variety concurred , stating , " Infinity War is a brashly entertaining jamboree , structured to show off each hero or heroine and give them just enough to do , and to update their mythologies without making it all feel like homework . "
Rolling Stones Peter Travers said the film is " too much of a good thing " and wrote , " The Russo brothers have clearly never learned the concept that less is more .
They 've used the premise of an Avengers reunion to put on a fireworks explosion of action and laughs that wo n't quit . "
Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun - Times called it Marvel 's " biggest and most ambitious movie yet " , but concluded " it 's certainly not the best .
However , there 's plenty of action , humor and heart — and some genuinely effective dramatic moments .
" Roeper went on to praise the film 's cast and Josh Brolin in particular , whom he called " the film 's most interesting performance " .
Gleiberman called Brolin 's motion capture performance " supremely effective " and said , " Brolin infuses Thanos with his slit - eyed manipulative glower , so that the evil in this movie never feels less than personal . "
McCarthy wrote , " Brolin 's calm , considered reading of the character bestows this conquering beast with an unexpectedly resonant emotional dimension , making him much more than a thick stick figure of a supervillain . "
McCarthy also praised the film 's action sequences , saying " Infinity War brims with tensely spectacular combat sequences , even if the question of who 's going to win each one has that extravagantly arbitrary could - Mighty - Mouse - beat - up - Superman ? quality . "
Gleiberman called the scale of the action , " astonishing " , and Travers wrote , " Avengers :
Infinity War leaves viewers up in the air , feeling exhilarated and cheated at the same time , aching for a closure that never comes ... at least not yet . "
Josh Spiegel , also of The Hollywood Reporter , said the film takes " a cue from the ending of The Empire Strikes Back in its super - sized finale ; this is the equivalent of Han Solo frozen in the carbonite , on steroids . "
A. O. Scott of The New York Times criticized the film 's reliance on other films in the Marvel Cinematic Universe , saying , " Considered on its own , as a single , nearly 2-hour-40-minute movie , Avengers :
Infinity War makes very little sense " , but conceded that it " was never meant to be viewed or judged in isolation " .
Richard Brody of The New Yorker agreed , stating , " The insubstantiality of the film is n't due to the infinite yet flimsy malleability of C.G.I. gimmickry but , instead , to the dispersion of its drama throughout the many cinematic installations set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe . "
Stephanie Zacharek of Time said , " [ It ] is n't really a beginning , but more of a middle or an end with a new piece of yarn attached .
You need to have seen and internalized every one of the previous 18 Marvel Cinematic Universe movies to fully get it . "
Justin Chang of the Los Angeles Times called it a " brisk , propulsive , occasionally rousing and borderline - gutsy continuation of a saga that finally and sensibly seems to be drawing to a close " , but called its ultimate bid for catharsis " unsuccessful " , saying , " Not even the threat of universal annihilation , it seems , will keep this assembly line from chugging ahead with its signature polished , mechanized efficiency .
" Scott also criticized the action sequences , calling them " tedious and predictable " and writing , " The noisy , bloated spectacles of combat were surely the most expensive parts of the movie , but the money seems less like an imaginative tool than a substitute for genuine imagination . "
Likewise , Zacharek said , " There 's no pacing in Avengers : Infinity War .
It 's all sensation and no pulse .
Everything is big , all of the time . "
AUDIENCE RESPONSE Section::::Audience response .
American YouTube personality
Tony
" Nem " Mitchell watched the film 103 times in theaters , a world record .
When Mitchell 's streak was gaining media awareness around his 44th viewing , he noted that IMAX reached out to give him 50 free tickets to continue the streak , and the Russo brothers invited him to Endgames premiere .
Mitchell said this was the way
he " want[ed ] to support Marvel and the Russo brothers .
"
Seventeen - year - old Kieran Harvey from Staffordshire also watched the film in theaters 100 times .
Harvey stated that he " did n't plan on seeing it this many times it just sort of happened " adding that Infinity War " just felt so different to anything I 've ever seen before , and I just love it so much so have been going as much as I can ! "
The ending of the film sparked various Internet meme reactions , particularly one related to Spider - Man saying he does not feel good as he disintegrates , which was applied to other aspects of pop culture .
The website , DidThanosKill .
Me was created for fans to see if they would have been spared by Thanos or not .
The ending also spawned the creation of the Reddit subreddit , /r / thanosdidnothingwrong .
A user within the subreddit suggested that half of the approximately 20,000 subscribers at the time be banned from the subreddit , in order to mimic the events of the film .
After the community agreed to the measure , the moderators approached Reddit 's administrators to see if the mass ban would even be possible .
Once the administrators agreed to the random ban of half the subscribers , it was set to occur on July 9 , 2018 .
Notice of the impending ban made the subreddit 's subscribers increase to over 700,000 , including both of the Russos who subscribed .
Ahead of the ban , Brolin posted a video saying " Here we go , Reddit users , " and ending it with a snap .
Over 60,000 people watched a live Twitch stream of the ban occurring , which lasted a couple hours .
The ban of over 300,000 accounts , which included Anthony Russo , was the largest in Reddit 's history .
Those banned then gathered in the new subreddit , /r / inthesoulstone .
One Reddit user who participated felt the ban "
embodie[d ] the spirit of the Internet " with people " banding together , en masse , around something relatively meaningless but somehow decidedly awesome and hilarious . "
Andrew Tigani of Screen Rant spoke of the ban and how /r / thanosdidnothingwrong " only speaks to how impactful the film has already become to pop culture .
It is also a testament to how valuable fan interaction can be via social media . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
!
scope="col " Year ! scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Category ! scope="col " Recipient(s ) ! scope="col " Result !
scope="col " class="unsortable " Grammy Awards Best Instrumental Composition Alan Silvestri for " Infinity War " SEQUEL
Section::::Sequel .
Avengers : Endgame is scheduled to be released on April 26 , 2019 , with the Russos returning to direct , and Markus and McFeely once again writing the screenplay .
SEE ALSO
* List of films featuring powered exoskeletons NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS