THE EXPANSE ( TV SERIES )
The Expanse is an American science fiction television series developed by Mark Fergus and Hawk Ostby , based on The Expanse series of novels by James S. A. Corey .
The series is set in a future where humanity has colonized the Solar System and follows United Nations executive Chrisjen Avasarala ( Shohreh Aghdashloo ) , police detective Josephus Miller ( Thomas Jane ) , ship 's officer Jim Holden ( Steven Strait ) and his crew , as they unravel a conspiracy that threatens peace in the system and the survival of humanity .
The series was well received by critics , who highlighted its visuals , character development and political narrative .
It received a Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation as well as three Saturn Award nominations for Best Science Fiction Television Series .
Alcon Entertainment produces and finances the series .
It sold three seasons to Syfy , which canceled the series in May 2018 ; Amazon Video picked up a fourth season of the series later that month .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Hundreds of years in the future , in a colonized Solar System , police detective Josephus Miller ( Thomas Jane ) , born on Ceres in the asteroid belt , is assigned to find a missing young woman , Juliette " Julie " Andromeda Mao ( Florence Faivre ) .
James Holden ( Steven Strait ) , the Executive Officer of the ice hauler Canterbury , is involved in a tragic incident that threatens to destabilize the uneasy peace between Earth , Mars and the Belt .
On Earth , Chrisjen Avasarala ( Shohreh Aghdashloo ) , a United Nations executive , works to prevent war between Earth and Mars by any means necessary .
Soon , the three find out that the missing woman and the ice hauler 's fate are part of a vast conspiracy that threatens humanity .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* Thomas Jane as Josephus " Joe " Aloisus Miller , a Belter detective on Ceres assigned to find Julie Mao ( seasons 1–2 ; special guest season 3 )
* Steven Strait as James " Jim " Holden , the Earther captain of the Rocinante , formerly the executive officer of the Canterbury
* Cas Anvar as Alex Kamal , the Martian pilot of the Rocinante , formerly the pilot of the Canterbury * Dominique Tipper as Naomi Nagata , the Belter engineer of the Rocinante , formerly of the Canterbury * Wes Chatham as Amos Burton , the Earther mechanic of the Rocinante , formerly a mechanic of the Canterbury * Paulo Costanzo as Shed Garvey , the Canterburys medical technician ( season 1 )
* Florence Faivre as Juliette " Julie " Andromeda Mao , the missing daughter of business tycoon Jules - Pierre Mao ( seasons 1–2 ; special appearance season 3 ) * Shawn Doyle as Sadavir Errinwright , UN Undersecretary of Executive Administration ( seasons 1–3 ) * Shohreh Aghdashloo as Chrisjen Avasarala , UN Deputy Undersecretary of Executive Administration * Frankie Adams as Roberta " Bobbie " Draper , a Martian Marine gunnery sergeant ( season 2–present ) RECURRING * Chad L. Coleman as Frederick " Fred " Lucius Johnson , " The Butcher of Anderson Station , " a former UNN colonel - turned - leader of the OPA ( Outer Planets Alliance ) * Andrew Rotilio as Diogo Harari , a young Belter from Ceres
* Athena Karkanis as Octavia " Tavi " Muss , Miller 's former partner ( season 1 ) * Jared Harris as Anderson Dawes ,
the OPA 's Ceres liaison * François Chau as Jules - Pierre Mao , the owner of Mao - Kwikowski Mercantile , its subsidiary Protogen , and Julie 's father
* Jay Hernandez as Dmitri Havelock , Miller 's Earther partner with Star Helix Security ( season 1 ) * Lola Glaudini as Shaddid , the captain of Star Helix Security 's Ceres detachment ( season 1 ) * Kevin Hanchard as " Semi " Sematimba , a detective on Eros , and an old friend of Miller 's ( season 1 ) * Martin Roach as Souther , UNN admiral , former UNN Fleet Commander , now commander of the UN 's Jupiter fleet ( seasons 1–3 ) * Daniel Kash as Antony Dresden , Protogen 's head of biological research ( seasons 1–2 ) * Brian George as Arjun Avasarala , Chrisjen 's husband * Greg Bryk as K. Lopez , a MCRN lieutenant assigned to the MCRN Donnager ( season 1 ) * Elias Toufexis as Kenzo Gabriel , a corporate spy on Tycho Station ( season 1 ) , and the Protomolecule Hybrids ( seasons 2–3 )
* Nick E. Tarabay as Cotyar Ghazi , a security professional working for Avasarala ( seasons 2–3 ) * Cara Gee as Camina Drummer , Johnson 's Belter second - in - command and captain of the OPAS Behemoth ( season 2–present ) * Mpho Koaho as Richard Travis , an Earth - born MMC private in Draper 's squad ( season 2 )
* Sarah Allen as Hillman , a MMC private in Draper 's squad ( season 2 )
* Dewshane Williams as Sa'id , a MMC corporal in Draper 's squad ( season 2 )
* Peter Outerbridge as Martens , a MCRN captain assigned to the MCRN Scirocco ( season 2 ) * Conrad Pla as Janus , a UN colonel assigned to the UNS Arboghast ( season 2 )
* Byron Mann as Augusto Nguyễn , a UNN fleet admiral ( season 2–3 )
* Ted Whittall as Michael Iturbi , a UNN scientist assigned to the UNS Arboghast ( season 2 )
* Terry Chen as Praxideke " Prax " Meng , a Ganymedian botanist ( season 2–present )
* Leah Jung as Mei Meng , Prax 's daughter ( season 2–present )
* Ted Atherton as Lawrence Strickland , a Protogen pediatrician on Ganymede ( seasons 2–3 ) * Jonathan Whittaker as Esteban Sorrento - Gillis , UN Secretary General ( seasons 2–3 )
* Elizabeth Mitchell as Rev. Dr. Annushka " Anna " Volovodov , a Europan Methodist pastor ( season 3 ) * David Strathairn as Klaes Ashford , a former Belter pirate and now the second - in - command of OPAS Behemoth ( season 3 )
* Anna Hopkins as Monica Stuart , a journalist from Earth filming a documentary on the crew of Rocinante ( season 3 ) * Brandon McGibbon as Cohen , a cameraman from Earth filming a documentary on Rocinante with Monica ( season 3 )
* Nadine Nicole as Melba Alzbeta Koh / Clarissa Mao , a mysterious newly appointed technician aboard UNN Thomas Prince ( season 3 )
* Genelle Williams as Tilly Fagan , a rich heiress who travels to The Ring seeking adventure and excitement , and who befriends Anna ( season 3 )
EPISODES
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
The Expanse is based on the novel series of the same name by James S. A. Corey , a pen name of the authors Daniel Abraham and Ty Franck , who also serve as writers and producers for the show .
The first novel , Leviathan Wakes ( 2011 ) , was nominated for the Hugo Award for Best Novel and Locus Award for Best Science Fiction Novel .
On April 11 , 2014 , Syfy announced a straight - to - series commitment to a television adaptation of the book series , and ordered the production of 10 one - hour - long episodes for the first season .
On that date Syfy President Dave Howe commented : " The Expanse is epic in scale and scope and promises to be Syfy 's most ambitious series to date " .
Mark Fergus and Hawk Ostby wrote the pilot , directed by Terry McDonough , and serve as writers and showrunners alongside Naren Shankar .
Produced by Alcon Television and The Sean Daniel Company , principal photography started on October 29 , 2014 , in Toronto .
The pilot episode was screened at San Diego Comic - Con in July 2015 .
In May 2015 , before the first season aired , writing commenced for a second season , which was ordered in December 2015 .
The second season of The Expanse premiered on February 1 , 2017 .
On March 16 , 2017 , The Expanse was renewed by Syfy for a 13-episode third season to air in 2018 .
Filming for season 3 began on July 12 , 2017 .
Four digital comics based on the books and tying into the television series have been published by ComiXology .
The first focuses on the origin of James Holden and was released February 1 , 2017 .
The next three , highlighting the origins of other characters are : Naomi Nagata , released April 19 , 2017 ; Alex Kamal , released May 24 , 2017 ; and Amos Burton , released July 12 , 2017 .
The show 's title sequence was animated and directed by Australian studio Breeder and its VFX team .
CANCELLATION AND RENEWAL Section::::Cancellation and renewal .
On May 11 , 2018 , Syfy did not purchase the rights for future seasons because of restrictive distribution arrangements , and announced it was cancelled .
Alcon looked for other channels to distribute future seasons .
Fans protested the cancellation , gathering over 100,000 signatures for an online petition .
They lobbied Amazon Studios and Netflix to pick the series up ; a crowdfunding campaign paid for an airplane to fly a " # SaveTheExpanse " banner around Amazon Studios .
Celebrities including Wil Wheaton , George R. R. Martin , Patton Oswalt and Andreas Mogensen supported the campaign .
On May 26 , at the International Space Development Conference , Jeff Bezos announced that Amazon picked the series up for additional seasons .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The show 's soundtrack was composed by Clinton Shorter .
The first season 's soundtrack dubbed The Expanse Season 1 – The Original Television Soundtrack , consisting of nineteen tracks , was released by Lakeshore Records , on May 20 , 2016 via iTunes , and on May 26 , 2016 via Amazon .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
In the United States , The Expanse is broadcast by Syfy and streamed on Amazon Prime .
In Canada , the series airs on Space and streams on CraveTV .
In New Zealand , the series airs on Sky .
In all other countries where Netflix is available , seasons 1 and 2 were streamed until September 30 , 2018 .
RECEPTION
SEASON 1
Section::::Reception .
Section::::Season 1 .
The first season received a rating of 65 out of 100 on Metacritic based on reviews from 23 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the season has a score of 76 % with an average rating of 7.12 out of 10 based on 42 reviews .
The site 's consensus states : " The Expanse blends sci - fi elements and detective noir into a visually compelling whole , though it takes a few episodes for the story to capture viewers ' intrigue . "
Reporting on the pilot screening , io9s Lauren Davis declared herself " blown away " by The Expanse , appreciating its " incredible sense of scale " and its " deeply thought out future world that reflects on our present one , with high production values and characters who speak and act like real people " .
Max Nicholson of IGN characterized the pilot as " grim and dramatic " , and a " very dense hour of television " , with the terminology and large cast sometimes difficult to follow for viewers unfamiliar with the novels , but highlighted the pilot 's " gorgeous " visuals and effects reminiscent of Battlestar Galactica , Dune and Firefly .
Writing for Variety , Maureen Ryan was unimpressed by the first four episodes " awkwardly linking a series of somewhat muddled stories " and the series ' stereotypical characters , but credited it with tackling " issues of class , representation and exploitation " , and a convincing design .
At Tor.com , Justin Landon highlighted The Expanses " bold and unique cinematography " and its claustrophobic , discomforting set designs , as well as the " extremely faithful " characterization , but remarked that the patois spoken by the Belters , the natives of the asteroid belt , made the series difficult to follow .
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
The second season was also received favorably .
On Metacritic , it has a score of 77 out of 100 based on 5 reviews .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the season has a score of 95 % with an average rating of 8.83 out of 10 based on 20 reviews .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " The Expanses second season offers more of the show 's excellent signature production values while increasing character development and politically thrilling narratives . "
Writing for io9 , Katherine Trendacosta noted how the show had become " shockingly prescient " , insofar as many of the issues and ideas explored by The Expanse mirrored contemporary trends in global politics .
Brian Tallerico , in " Why The Expanse Is the Best Sci - FI TV Show You 're Not Watching " for Rolling Stone , praised the show for its contemporary political relevance and called its willingness to mix tones , and its protagonists , laudable .
He summarized that at its core , The Expanse was all about people responding to fear – fear of the other , fear of the new , fear of inequality , fear of death .
Writing for NPR , astrophysicist Adam Frank praised the show and its writers for the scientific realism .
He wrote that " more than any other TV space - themed show , it gets the science right " .
SEASON 3
Section::::Season 3 .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the season has a score of 100 % with an average rating of 8.75 out of 10 based on 12 reviews .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Building on earlier potential and extending character arcs throughout a solidly crafted third season , The Expanse continues to impress – and shows no signs of abating . "
RATINGS ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
!
scope="col " Year ! scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Category ! scope="col " Nominee(s ) ! scope="col " Result ! scope="col " Directors Guild of Canada AwardsSaturn Awards
Best Science Fiction Television Series
The Expanse Visual Effects Society Awards
Outstanding Visual Effects in a Photoreal Episode Robert Munroe , Clint Green , Kyle Menzies , Tom Turnbull
Saturn Awards
Best Science Fiction Television Series
The Expanse
People 's Choice Awards
The Sci - Fi / Fantasy Show of 2018
The Expanse Saturn Awards Best Science Fiction Television Series
The Expanse REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS