THE ROYALS ( TV SERIES )
The Royals is an American prime time television soap opera that premiered on E ! on March 15 , 2015 .
Created by Mark Schwahn and starring Elizabeth Hurley , it is the network 's first scripted series .
The show began as a loose adaptation of the Michelle Ray novel Falling for Hamlet .
E ! renewed The Royals for a second season two months before its debut , and picked up a third season on January 5 , 2016 .
E ! renewed the series for a fourth season on February 16 , 2017 ; the fourth season premiered on March 11 , 2018 .
On August 16 , 2018 , it was announced that E ! had canceled the series after four seasons .
Additionally , it was reported that Lionsgate Television was shopping the series to other networks with discussions already underway for a pick - up by sister network Pop .
However , on September 24 , 2018 , it was announced that Lionsgate Television had failed to find a new home for the series and that it was now considered officially ended .
Hurley starred as Queen Helena , a fictional contemporary queen consort of England , along with William Moseley and Alexandra Park as her twin children , Prince Liam and Princess Eleanor ;
Jake Maskall as Helena 's brother - in - law and nemesis , the new King Cyrus ; Tom Austen as Eleanor 's bodyguard and blackmailer , Jasper Frost ; and Oliver Milburn as Ted Pryce , the Royal Family 's head of security .
Season 1 also starred Vincent Regan as Helena 's husband , King Simon , and Merritt Patterson as Liam 's love interest , Ophelia Pryce .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
Helena is the matriarch of a fictional contemporary British royal family who must struggle with both common and atypical family dramas while in the public eye .
Twins Prince Liam and Princess Eleanor enjoy the hedonistic pleasures available to them as royals , knowing that their older brother Robert bears the responsibility of being heir to the throne of England .
But when Robert is killed , the family is thrown into disarray and a grieving King Simon fears for the future of the monarchy .
Unexpectedly next in line for the throne , Liam must adjust to his new role while navigating his attraction to Ophelia , the American daughter of the royal head of security .
His self - destructive sister Eleanor finds rock - bottom when her bodyguard turns out to be a conman .
Trying to preserve the status quo and keep the royal family under her control , Queen Helena allies herself with Simon 's brother Cyrus to preserve their way of life at any cost .
CAST
MAIN
RECURRING
Tanveer Ghani
Crenshaw
A reporter Andrew Steele Colin Yorke
A politician with whom Helena rekindles a past affair
colspan="3
" Emily Barber Cassandra Von Halen
A candidate on the King 's list of potential brides colspan="3
" Richard Brake Earl Frost / Count Bellagio Jasper 's father , a con man colspan="3
"
Nina Young Felicity Moreno Willow 's mother colspan="3
"
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
In April 2013 , E ! announced several scripted projects it had in development , including The Royals , a " contemporary family ensemble is steeped in all of the regal opulence of the British Monarchy and framed by Shakespeare 's Hamlet . "
Deadline Hollywood reported in June 2013 that E ! would be producing pilots for The Royals and another series named Songbyrd , which would be the network 's first scripted pilots to date .
The Royals was picked up for series in March 2014 , to be shot in the United Kingdom and scheduled to debut in 2015 .
Shooting for the first season began in London in June 2014 .
In August 2014 , E ! released its first promotional trailer for The Royals .
The first season consisted of ten episodes .
In December 2014 , E ! announced that the series would premiere on March 15 , 2015 .
The network later announced at the Television Critics Association press tour on January 15 , 2015 , that the series had been renewed for a second season , two months before its debut .
E
! 's Executive Vice President of Original Programming & Development
Jeff Olde noted that production for season two would begin in London in spring 2015 .
Shooting officially resumed on June 15 , 2015 , with season two premiering on November 15 , 2015 .
On January 5 , 2016 , E ! renewed The Royals for a third season , which premiered on December 4 , 2016 .
Several days before the season three finale , the series was renewed for a fourth season on February 16 , 2017 , which premiered on March 11 , 2018 .
Schwahn was suspended from the series after the completion of season four filming on November 15 , 2017 , following sexual harassment allegations against him by female casts and crew of both The Royals and his previous series One Tree Hill came to light .
He was subsequently fired from the series on December 22 , 2017 .
On August 16 , 2018 , it was announced that E ! had canceled the series after four seasons .
Additionally , it was reported that Lionsgate Television was shopping the series to other networks with discussions already underway for a pick - up by sister network Pop .
However on September 24 , 2018 , it was announced that Lionsgate Television had failed to find a new home for the series and that it was now considered officially ended .
The production uses Blenheim Palace as its fictional royal palace .
In season two , the production also filmed at Allington Castle and Boughton Monchelsea Place in Kent .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
In September 2013 , Hurley was cast in the leading role of Queen Helena .
Soon after , Moseley was cast as Helena 's son Liam , followed by Park as Liam 's twin sister Eleanor and Haley Lu Richardson as his love interest , Ophelia .
The rest of the pilot 's cast included Regan , Austen , Maskall , Roach and Milburn .
After the series pickup , Merritt Patterson replaced Richardson as Ophelia in June 2014 , as shooting for the first season began in London .
Additional recurring roles included Bewley and Preston as Cyrus ' eccentric daughters Penelope and Maribel , and Colquhoun as Gemma , Liam 's heiress ex - girlfriend .
In August 2014 , People reported that Joan Collins would guest star as the Grand Duchess of Oxford , Helena 's mother .
In June 2015 , Laila Rouass was cast as Rani , the Deputy Prime Minister whom the actress calls " Elizabeth Hurley 's arch - enemy " .
For season 2 , Hatty Preston was replaced as Princess Maribel with Jerry - Jane Pears , the difference in their appearance explained by plastic surgery .
In June 2016 , Max Brown was cast as Prince Robert , the presumed - dead eldest son of Simon and Helena , and Jules Knight was cast as Spencer Koenigsberg , Helena 's new Lord Chamberlain .
Genevieve Gaunt , who played Liam 's potential love interest Willow in season 2 , was also promoted from recurring to series regular for season 3 .
Hurley 's son Damian Hurley was cast in a guest star role in July 2016 .
CONCEPT AND CHARACTERIZATION Section::::Concept and characterization .
The Royals is loosely based on the Michelle Ray novel Falling for Hamlet .
Alessandra Stanley of The New York Times described the show as " a tongue - in - cheek nighttime soap " and " a Dynasty about a real dynasty " .
Creator Schwahn said of the series , " It 's a family drama .
It 's about a family , and it just happens to be a royal family ...
[ but ] not the royal family .
"
Hurley called The Royals " a very nice combination of what the public sees and what the public will never see .
" Of the concept , Schwann said : Schwahn said of Hurley , " I tell her every day that this was the role that she was meant to play ...
she has found her lot in life " Of her character , Hurley commented " this queen is very matriarchal ...
she has a lot of power
and I think she knows how to use it . "
She noted , however , that " there 's no correlation at all between Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth and my Queen Helena ...
If Princess Diana [ sic ] , for example , had become queen of England , that would be a more similar age group .
" Hurley later said that the character of Helena was inspired by Diana , but " some of it
we picked from Cruella de Vil , the Disney character .
" Noting that " most of the characters on The Royals are going to be walking a fine line between ' good ' and ' bad ' , " Schwahn said : Regan said of his character , the " soft - spoken " King Simon : " He 's coping with a great deal of grief for the loss of his eldest son , Robert ...
He 's coping with that and trying to work out how the royal family can exist in the world they 're now in . "
Moseley commented on his own storyline as playboy Prince Liam , " it 's like ( if )
Prince Harry was thrown into being the next King of England [ sic ] . "
" He basically is sort of a rebel ... does n't really care what anybody thinks , does whatever he wants to do , when he wants to do it , " he later added .
Park said of her wild Princess Eleanor , " she 's young and trying to find where her place is in the world .
She 's a party girl . "
Austen said of bodyguard Jasper , " He 's a very mysterious character ...
you never know what to expect from him .
There 's a lot of stuff that only Mark [ Schwahn ] and me know about , so there 's a lot of secrets on set . "
Calling the show " uncompromising " , Austen added , " It 's about the lives of these people and it does n't try to pretend that they would try to do anything different than the way they would .
They 're all human beings with flaws , some more than others , and the show does n't shy away from that . "
EPISODES PROMOTION
Section::::Promotion .
In January 2015 , Collins commented on the public anticipation for The Royals , saying " I know there 's been a lot of excitement about it in the British press . "
Hurley suggested that fans of Dynasty and Gossip Girl would enjoy the series .
In March 2015 , a viral video of a naked man climbing out a window of Buckingham Palace on a bedsheet during the changing of the Queen 's Guard , presumed to be a hoax , was publicized internationally by a variety of sources including Cosmopolitan and the Daily Mail .
The video turned out to be a publicity stunt to promote The Royals via the show 's own fictional tabloid , D - Throned .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The initial reviews were largely negative .
Jane Mulkerrins of The Telegraph described The Royals as " a sexy and soapy portrayal of palace life " , but noted that it " lacks the sophistication " of Gossip Girl and " the compelling melodrama " of The O.C. Alessandra Stanley of The New York Times called the show " a mischievous sendup " and Hurley " amusing " , but said overall that the series " gets old , and dull , very quickly . "
Nancy Dewolf Smith of The Wall Street Journal described The Royals as " a trashy soap opera that 's not bad enough to be funny and is best when it wallows in melodrama " , and David Wiegand of the San Francisco Chronicle called the show " entertaining but disappointingly toothless " .
The Sydney Morning Herald described the series as " possibly the worst show in the history of TV " , criticizing it as " a bunch of bed - hopping halfwits saddled with ... very , very lousy dialogue " .
The Independent agreed , calling The Royals " probably " the " worst series ever made " .
Vicki Hyman of NJ.com said the show was " a royal failure , " describing it as " crass and , for long stretches , tedious . "
The Hollywood Reporter described The Royals as being " like an extended MTV music video interspersed with dialogue " and called it " interminably boring " .
The Los Angeles Times panned the series , declaring that " camp requires courage , and The Royals has none " , while Margaret Lyons of Vulture said the show was " flaccid , weirdly paced , and badly cast . "
Variety called The Royals " bloody bad " , and the Chicago Reader advised viewers to " think of the worst hour - long prime - time soap operas to have assaulted our senses over the past 30 or so years , then go ahead and add this one to your brain 's trash heap . " Conversely , David Hinckley of the New York Daily News wrote that The Royals " does n't pretend to be much more than good fun , and it delivers that . "
Diane Gordon of TheWrap described the show as " addictive , naughty and just the right amount of silly ...
it left me wanting more " .
Calling it " an escapist fantasy " , Amanda Michelle Steiner of People wrote that " The Royals is everything that 's been missing from your life since Gossip Girl and The O.C ..
" Ellen Gray of Philly.com also called it " silly but potentially addictive " .
Kevin Fallon of The Daily Beast added that " once you commit yourself to the trashy abandon of The Royals , the one critique of the show might be that the abandon is n't reckless or campy enough " .
Jeff Jensen of Entertainment Weekly agreed , noting that the show " actually is n't bad ...
if anything , you 'll wish The Royals were trashier " .
The performances have generally received praise .
Jensen called the acting " uniformly good " , and Fallon deemed Hurley " fantastic in this role " .
Wiegand added , " The unquestionable highlight of the series is the mother - and - daughter reunion between Queen Helena [ Hurley ] and the Grand Duchess of Oxford [ Joan Collins ] " .
Dewolf Smith singled out Park 's Eleanor as " the best and worst of what The Royals has to offer " and noted that Hatty Preston and Lydia Rose Bewley " steal their scenes in an Absolutely Fabulous sort of way " .
Steiner concurred , writing " [ Preston and Bewley 's ] banter is possibly the best part of the premiere . " U.S. RATINGS Section::::U.S. ratings . !
No . !
Episode !
Air date !
Time slot ( EST ) !
Rating / Share ( 18–49 ) !
Viewers ( m ) ! 0.50 !
1.412 ! 0.60 !
1.321 !
0.333 !
0.825 ! 0.51 !
1.119 ! 0.46 !
1.070 ! 0.45 !
1.123 !
0.52 !
1.125 !
0.55 !
1.185 !
0.56 !
1.172 !
0.53 !
1.148 !
0.41 ! 0.841 ! 0.40 !
0.725 ! 0.24 !
0.532 !
0.31 !
0.627 ! 0.28 !
0.653 ! 0.30 !
0.705 ! 0.26 ! 0.671 ! 0.37 !
0.824 !
0.38 !
0.814 !
0.40 !
0.848 !
0.26 !
0.609 !
0.31 ! 0.679 ! 0.21 !
0.532 ! 0.20 ! 0.458 !
0.26 !
0.535 ! 0.21 !
0.464 ! 0.23 !
0.565 ! 0.20 ! 0.502 !
0.17 ! 0.466 !
0.20 !
0.520 BROADCAST , HOME VIDEO , AND STREAMING Section::::Broadcast , home video , and streaming .
The Royals airs on E ! in the United States and Canada .
It also aired on E ! in the United Kingdom and Ireland , although the channel dropped the series after season two .
In Germany the series is shown on Pro Sieben .
Amazon.com acquired exclusive subscription streaming rights to The Royals in October 2015 , making the first season of the show available to stream for Amazon Prime subscribers .
The first season is also available on the E Now mobile app ( for cable subscribers ) , as well as the Canadian OTT video service CraveTV .
Outside of the SVOD and cable subscription space , the show is available from electronic sell - through platforms such as iTunes , Amazon Instant Video and Vudu .
DVD RELEASE Section::::DVD release . !
rowspan="2"Name !
colspan="3"Release dates !
rowspan="2"Ep
# !
rowspan="2"Additional information !
Region 1 !
Region 2 !
Region 4
The Complete First Season August 18 , 2015 July 27 , 2015
* English / Spanish subtitles
The Complete Second Season March 22 , 2016 April 18 , 2016
* English / Spanish subtitles , Region 1 contains digital copies of episodes } REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS