SPOTTED LANTERNFLY
The spotted lanternfly ( Lycorma delicatula ) is a planthopper that is indigenous to China , India , and Vietnam .
Although it has two pairs of wings , it jumps more than it flies .
Its host plants are grapes , pines , stone fruits , and Malus species .
In its native habitat it is kept in check by natural predators or pathogens .
It was accidentally introduced in Korea in 2006 and has since been considered a pest .
In September 2014 , it was first recorded in the United States , and it is now an invasive species in eastern Pennsylvania and southwestern New Jersey .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The spotted lanternfly is originally native to parts of China , India , Vietnam , and eastern Asia .
It is a one - inch - long and half - inch wide planthopper belonging to the family of the fulgorid insects .
The lantern analogy stems from the inflated front portion of the head , which was thought to be luminous .
It was first described by Adam White in 1845 as Aphaena delicatula with habitat outside of Nankin , China .
Adult lantern flies have a black head and grayish wings adorned with the name - giving black spots , and their bodies seem to glow red .
Their wing tips have a pattern that looks as if they are covered with tiny black bricks with grey mortar in between .
In flight , the spotted lantern fly displays red hind wings with black spots on the proximal third , a white wedge in the middle of the wing , and a solid black wing tip .
The abdomen is yellowish with black and white bands on the top and bottom .
The lanternfly is a strong jumper ; it hops from location to location more than it flies .
In Chinese medicine , the spotted lanternfly is considered to be poisonous , and is used topically for relief from swelling .
It feeds on woody plants and nonwoody plants , piercing the phloem tissue of foliage and young stems with its specialized mouthparts , and sucking the sap .
The sugary fluid leaks and coats leaves and stems , and this can encourage mold growth .
It does not eat the fruit or the leaves per se .
The lantern fly has a wide host range .
Innumerable host plants are known , including grapes , pines , the Rosaceae with stone fruits , and apple species .
LIFECYCLE Section::::Lifecycle .
Beginning in late April to early May , nymphs hatch from their egg cases .
A nymph passes through several immature stages .
In the first stage it is wingless and looks black with white spots .
It then grows red patches in addition to the white spots .
Next , it has red wing pads and a red upper body , before assuming the adult look of black head and grayish wings with black spots .
Nymphs can not fly , so they hop or crawl to search for plants to feed on .
Young nymphs appear to have a wider host range early on , which narrows as they grow older .
As early as July , adults can be seen .
In the fall , adults mate and lay eggs from late September through the onset of winter .
In their native Indomalayan habitat they will lay their eggs preferably on the Tree of Heaven ( Ailanthus altissima ) , which is an introduced invasive tree with toxic metabolites .
This host choice is thought to have evolved as mechanism of protection from natural enemies .
The lanternfly will lay eggs upon any smooth trunked tree , stone or vertical smooth surface , including man made items like vehicles , campers , yard furniture , farm equipment or other items stored outside .
The egg masses contain 30–50 eggs , covered in a yellowish brown waxy deposit , the egg case .
The lanternfly 's life expectancy , is one year .
The minimum temperature that will kill eggs was estimated by South Korean researchers to be between −3.4 and −12.7 ° C ( 25.9 and 9.1 ° F ) on the basis of mean daily temperatures during their winter of 2009/2010 .
This estimate contrasts with eggs having survived the much colder winter 2013/14 temperatures in Pennsylvania , United States .
HOST PLANT SIGNS OF INFESTATION Section::::Host plant signs of infestation .
Trees can develop weeping wounds of sap on their trunks .
Heavy infestations can cause honeydew secretions to build up at the base of the tree , blackening the soil with fungal mats around the base of the tree .
The sap may attract ants , bees , hornets , and wasps to feed on it .
The plant may be stunted or even die .
ACCIDENTAL INTRODUCTION IN
SOUTH KOREA Section::::Accidental introduction .
Section::::In South Korea .
In 2006 , the spotted lanternfly was accidentally introduced in Korea , and has been considered a pest since about 2007 , as it expanded its host range , attacking at least 65 plant species , uninhibited by a natural enemy .
IN THE UNITED STATES Section::::In the United States .
The spotted lanternfly was first detected in the United States in Berks County , northwest of Philadelphia , Pennsylvania .
On 22 September 2014 , the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture and the Pennsylvania Game Commission confirmed its presence .
Based on its host affinities , it presented a threat to the state 's grape , fruit tree , and logging industries , because the greatest risk of spread was seen in people transporting materials containing egg masses laid on smooth bark , stone , and other vertical surfaces .
The Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture banned transport of items that could harbor the hopper , including firewood , lawn mowers , outdoor chairs , trucks , and RVs from seven municipalities on November 1 , 2014 .
Given the presence of old egg masses , the insect was estimated to have been in the area since at least 2012 , having survived the 2013/14 winter 's unusual cold .
A national working group led by the U.S. Department of Agriculture , consisting of university and USDA scientists , was organized " to determine what is known about the lanternfly and what research is needed , including DNA analysis to pinpoint where the infestation originated . "
In July 2018 , spotted lanternfly was confirmed in three New Jersey counties , in September 2018 in two New York locations as well as in Virginia .
PEST CONTROL Section::::Pest control .
The Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture recommends ( based on information from PennState Extension ):
* Kill eggs October through May by scraping them off of surfaces , " double bag them and throw them in the garbage , " or scrape the eggs directly into a ziploc bag of alcohol or hand sanitizer to kill them .
*
* Removing spotted lanternfly hosts , the Ailanthus altissima tree ( Chinese sumac or tree of heaven ) saving only male individuals to use as " trap " trees , since the spotted lanternfly requires a meal from this tree before laying eggs .
Remaining male " trap " trees should be wrapped with sticky bands starting in early spring to catch any nymphs .
*
* Trees can be treated with systemic pesticides June – August .
The Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture recommends tree injection and bark sprays ( applied by professional applicators ) , and soil drench and foliar sprays ( can be applied by homeowners ) .
It recommends seven different pesticides as of June 2018 .
* Neonicotinoids , pyrethrins , and organophosphates are effective against spotted lanternfly .
Adults and second to fourth - instar nymphs appear to be attracted to spearmint oil , which could be used in their control .
Sticky traps at the base of tree trunks have also been used .
A parasitic wasp , Anastatus orientalis , was found to parasitize up to 69 % of spotted lanternfly eggs in China and is candidate biological pest control agent in South Korea .
SEE ALSO
* Invasive species REFERENCES