BATTLE CREEK ( TV SERIES )
Battle Creek is an American comedy - drama television series that premiered on CBS on March 1 , 2015 , as a weekly show broadcast on each Sunday .
Starring Josh Duhamel and Dean Winters , the show followed the mismatched partnership of a police detective and FBI agent in Battle Creek , Michigan .
CBS announced on May 8 , 2015 , after only 9 episodes had aired , that Battle Creek would end after 13 episodes .
CAST MAIN * Josh Duhamel as Special Agent Milton ' Milt ' Chamberlain * Dean Winters as Detective Russell ' Russ ' Agnew * Aubrey Dollar as Office Manager Holly Dale * Edward " Grapevine " Fordham Jr. as Detective Aaron ' Funk ' Funkhauser * Kal Penn as
Detective Fontanelle ' Font '
White
* Janet McTeer as Commander Kim ' Guz ' Guziewicz RECURRING * Liza Lapira as Detective Erin ' E ' Jacocks * Damon Herriman as Detective Niblet * Meredith Eaton as Meredith Oberling , BCPD 's medical examiner GUESTS
* Patton Oswalt as Battle Creek 's unorthodox mayor , Scooter Hardy ( in " Cereal Killer " )
* Peter Jacobson as Darrel Hardy , the mayor 's brother and chief of staff ( in " Cereal Killer " )
* Candice Bergen as Constance Agnew , a convicted con artist and Russ ' mother ( in " Mama 's Boy " ) * Dan Bakkedahl as Barclay Spades ( in " Gingerbread Man " ) * Robert Sean Leonard as Brock ( in " Sympathy for the Devil " ) * Joey Haro as Roger ( in " Sympathy for the Devil " ) DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION Section::::Development and production .
In September 2013 , Sony Pictures Television announced that it struck a deal with CBS to produce a new television series created by Vince Gilligan titled Battle Creek based on a script written by Gilligan ten years prior .
Despite the name , establishing shots and location shots were not shot in Battle Creek , Michigan .
However most of the scenes in the opening credits were filmed in Battle Creek .
The main actors visited Battle Creek , Michigan , in the summer of 2014 to get a feel of the location , people , and especially the police department .
CBS ordered thirteen episodes , all of which it guaranteed to air .
It premiered on CBS on March 1 , 2015 .
On May 8 , 2015 , the network announced that Battle Creek would not be renewed for a second season .
The series ended on May 24 , 2015 .
EPISODES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Official website