FEAR THE WALKING
DEAD
Fear
the Walking Dead is an American post - apocalyptic horror drama television series created by Robert Kirkman and Dave Erickson , that premiered on AMC on August 23 , 2015 .
It is a companion series and prequel to The Walking Dead , which is based on the comic book series of the same name by Robert Kirkman , Tony Moore , and Charlie Adlard .
In July 2018 , AMC renewed the series for a fifth season , which is set to premiere in 2019 .
Andrew Chambliss and Ian Goldberg have been the showrunners since the fourth season .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
Set initially in Los Angeles , California and then later in Mexico , the series follows a dysfunctional , blended family composed of high school guidance counselor Madison Clark , her English teacher fiancé Travis Manawa , her daughter Alicia , her drug addict son Nick , Travis 's son from a previous marriage , Chris , Chris 's mother Liza Ortiz , and others who join their group at the onset of the apocalypse .
They must reinvent themselves , learning new skills and adopting new attitudes in order to survive as civilization collapses around them .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* Kim Dickens as Madison Clark : An intelligent and domineering guidance counselor , the mother of Nick and Alicia , and Travis ' fiancée .
( seasons 1–4 )
* Cliff Curtis as Travis Manawa : A resolute and peacekeeping high school teacher , Madison 's fiancé , Chris ' father , and Liza 's ex - husband .
( seasons 1–3 )
* Frank Dillane as Nick Clark : A brave and selfless recovering heroin addict , Madison 's son , and Alicia 's brother .
( seasons 1–4 )
* Alycia Debnam - Carey as Alicia Clark :
The fiery yet compassionate daughter of Madison , and Nick 's sister .
* Elizabeth Rodriguez as Liza Ortiz : A no - nonsense and caring nursing student , Travis ' ex - wife , and Chris ' mother .
( season 1 ; guest season 2 ) * Mercedes Mason as Ofelia Salazar : The strong - willed and very capable daughter of Daniel and his wife Griselda .
( seasons 1–3 )
* Lorenzo James Henrie as Chris Manawa : Travis and Liza 's rebellious teenage son , who becomes more brutal due to the landscape of the deadly new world .
( seasons 1–2 )
* Rubén Blades as Daniel Salazar :
A courageous and practical former Sombra Negra member , a barber , Griselda 's husband , and Ofelia 's father .
( seasons 1–3 )
* Colman Domingo as Victor Strand : A smart and sophisticated conman - turned - businessman , who forms friendships with Nick and Madison .
( season 2–present ; guest season 1 )
* Michelle Ang as Alex : A pragmatic and quiet survivor introduced in the web series .
( season 2 ) * Danay García as Luciana Galvez : A strong and cautious former member of the La Colonia community in Tijuana , Mexico , and Nick 's girlfriend .
( season 3–present ; recurring season 2 ) * Daniel Sharman as Troy Otto : The charismatic and impulsive son of Jeremiah , and Jake 's half - brother .
( season 3 )
* Sam Underwood as Jake Otto : Jeremiah 's moralistic and wiser son , Troy 's half - brother , and Alicia 's love interest .
( season 3 ) * Dayton Callie as Jeremiah Otto : The racist and candid leader of Broke Jaw Ranch , and Jake and Troy 's father .
( season 3 ; guest season 2 )
* Lisandra Tena as Lola Guerrero : The generous and empathetic leader of a community stationed at a dam located in Tijuana , who is responsible for supplying water .
( season 3 )
* Maggie Grace as Althea : A curious and tactical journalist who encounters Morgan and John .
( season 4–present )
* Garret Dillahunt as John Dorie : A lonesome and friendly police officer whom Morgan encounters .
( season 4–present ) * Lennie James as Morgan Jones : A mentally unstable and ruthlessly pragmatic man , formerly a part of Rick Grimes ' group on The Walking Dead , who encounters the core group of survivors .
( season 4–present ) * Jenna Elfman as June / Naomi / Laura : A kind and mysterious nurse whom Madison encounters .
( season 4–present )
RECURRING LOS ANGELES * Scott Lawrence as Art " Artie " Costa : The principal at the high school where Madison and Travis work .
( season 1 ) * Lincoln A. Castellanos as Tobias : A
senior wise - beyond - his - years who is aware of the virus .
( season 1 ) * Patricia Reyes Spíndola as Griselda Salazar : Ofelia 's mother , who emigrated from El Salvador with her husband Daniel to escape political unrest .
( season 1 ; guest season 2 )
* Jamie McShane as Lt . Moyers : The leader of the National Guard contingent in charge of protecting Madison 's neighborhood .
( season 1 )
*
Shawn Hatosy as Cpl .
Andrew Adams : A well - intentioned military man with a soulful disposition , who is out of his element .
( season 1 )
* Sandrine Holt as Dr. Bethany Exner :
A confident and skilled doctor .
( season 1 ) PACIFIC
COAST
* Daniel Zovatto as Jack Kipling : A member of the pirates who develops an attraction to Alicia .
( season 2 )
* Jesse McCartney as Reed : Connor 's brother and a hostile member of the pirates .
( season 2 ) * Veronica Diaz as Vida :
A pregnant woman and one of Connor 's pirates .
( season 2 ) * Arturo Del Puerto as Luis Flores : An ally and right - hand man of Victor Strand and Thomas Abigail .
( season 2 ) MEXICO
* Dougray Scott as Thomas Abigail : Strand 's boyfriend and the namesake of the boat Abigail .
( season 2 )
* Marlene Forte as Celia Flores : Luis 's mother .
( season 2 )
* Paul Calderón as Alejandro Nuñez : A pharmacist and leader of La Colonia , a community in Tijuana , Mexico , he claims to have been bitten , but did not die .
( season 2 )
* Alejandro Edda as Marco Rodriguez : The leader of the gang who live near La Colonia .
( season 2 )
* Karen Bethzabe as Elena Reyes : The Rosario Beach hotel manager who helps Alicia .
( season 2 ; guest season 3 )
* Ramses Jimenez as Hector Reyes : Elena 's nephew who used to manage the hotel with her .
( season 2 ; guest season 3 )
* Andres Londono as Oscar Diaz : The leader of a group of survivors living at a hotel .
( season 2 )
* Raul Casso as Andrés Diaz :
Oscar 's brother .
( season 2 )
* Brenda Strong as Ilene Stowe : A member of the wedding party and mother - in - law of Oscar .
( season 2 ; guest season 3 )
* Kelly Blatz as Brandon Luke : The leader of a group of young men that befriend Chris .
( season 2 )
* Kenny Wormald as Derek : A member of Brandon 's group .
( season 2 )
* Israel Broussard as James McCallister :
A member of Brandon 's group .
( season 2 )
THE RANCH * Michael Greyeyes as Qaletaqa Walker :
A Native American in a war with Jeremiah Otto , who occupies his lands .
( season 3 ) * Michael William Freeman as Blake Sarno : A member of Broke Jaw Ranch 's militia .
( season 3 ) * Justin Rain as Lee " Crazy Dog " : The right - hand man of Qaletaqa .
( season 3 )
* Matt Lasky as Cooper : A member of Broke Jaw Ranch 's militia .
( season 3 )
THE DAM * Jesse Borrego as Efrain Morales : A man who saves Daniel 's life when he was injured by a fire .
( season 3 )
* Ray McKinnon as Proctor John : The leader of the gang known as the Proctors .
( season 3 ) BASEBALL STADIUM
* Sebastian Sozzi as Cole :
A resident of the community within the baseball stadium .
( season 4 )
* Rhoda Griffis as Vivian : A resident of the community within the baseball stadium .
( season 4 )
* Kenneth Wayne Bradley as Douglas : A resident of the community within the baseball stadium .
( season 4 )
THE VULTURES * Kevin Zegers as Melvin : An antagonistic leader of the Vultures .
( season 4 ) * Alexa Nisenson as Charlie : A young girl who is a spy for the Vultures until she defected to Althea 's group .
( season 4–present )
* Evan Gamble as Ennis : A member of the Vultures .
( season 4 )
TEXAS
* Aaron Stanford as Jim Brauer : A survivor who brews for a living .
( season 4 )
* Daryl Mitchell as Wendell : A wheelchair - bound man and the adoptive brother of Sarah .
( season 4–present )
* Mo Collins as Sarah : The adoptive sister of Wendell and a former Marine .
( season 4–present ) * Tonya Pinkins as Martha : A mysterious antagonistic woman who kills every survivor that tries to help someone else .
( season 4 ) EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
The first season consists of six episodes .
The second season , comprising 15 episodes , premiered on April 10 , 2016 .
On April 15 , 2016 , AMC announced the series had been renewed for a 16-episode third season , which premiered on June 4 , 2017 .
In April 2017 , AMC renewed the series for a 16-episode fourth season and announced that Andrew Chambliss and Ian Goldberg would replace the departing Dave Erickson as showrunners .
The fourth season premiered on April 15 , 2018 .
On July 28 , 2018 , the series was renewed for a fifth season , which is set to premiere in 2019 .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
In September 2013 , AMC announced they were developing a companion series to The Walking Dead , which follows a different set of characters created by Robert Kirkman .
In September 2014 , AMC ordered a pilot , which was written by Kirkman and Dave Erickson , and directed by Adam Davidson , and is executive produced by Kirkman , Erickson , Gale Anne Hurd , and David Alpert , with Erickson serving as showrunner .
The project was originally known as Cobalt ; Kirkman confirmed , in March 2015 , that the series would be titled Fear the Walking Dead .
On March 9 , 2015 , AMC announced it had ordered Fear the Walking Dead to series , with a two - season commitment .
The series premiered on August 23 , 2015 .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
In December 2014 , the first four starring roles were cast : Kim Dickens as Madison Clark , the female lead ; Cliff Curtis as Travis Manawa , the male lead ; Frank Dillane as Nick ; and Alycia Debnam - Carey as Alicia .
In April and May 2015 , Elizabeth Rodriguez and Mercedes Mason were announced as series regulars , both in unknown roles .
In November 2017 , it was confirmed that Lennie James who portrays Morgan Jones on The Walking Dead would crossover and join the main cast in the fourth season .
The fourth season also sees the additions of several new series regulars , played by Garret Dillahunt , Jenna Elfman , and Maggie Grace .
In December 2018 , it was reported that Rubén Blades and Daniel Sharman , who last appeared in the series ' third season , would return in the fifth season as Daniel Salazar and Troy Otto , respectively .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Production of the pilot episode began in early 2015 and ended on February 6 , 2015 .
The pilot and early episodes were filmed in Los Angeles , including Woodrow Wilson High School ; the remaining first - season episodes were filmed in Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada .
Production on the remaining five first - season episodes began on May 11 , 2015 .
Adam Davidson , who directed the pilot , also directed the series ' second and third episodes .
Filming for the second season began in December 2015 , with production moving to Baja California , Mexico .
Locations included Rosarito ( sea scenes and hotel ) and Valle de Guadalupe ( Abigail 's vineyard ) .
The sea scenes were filmed using a horizon tank at Baja Film Studios .
An additional scene from the season one finale was filmed in The Sunken City , San Pedro , Los Angeles .
Filming for the third season began on January 6 , 2017 , in Baja California , Mexico , with some of the same location sites used for the second half of season two .
Additional locations in Tijuana Municipality included Avenida Revolución , Abelardo L. Rodríguez Dam and the hills that hosted the Otto 's ranch .
Filming for the fourth season was underway in June 2018 in various locations around Austin , Texas , including the Dell Diamond , the vacant Brackenridge Hospital , and the flood - damaged Onion Creek neighborhood .
Filming for the fifth season began in December 2018 .
It was also confirmed by the showrunners that the season would be filmed in New Braunfels , Texas .
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
On August 23 , 2015 , the series debuted simultaneously worldwide on : AMC in the U.S. ; AMC Global in major regional markets in Africa , Asia , Europe , Latin America , and the Middle East ; and FX in Australia .
Hulu holds the show 's video on demand rights in the U.S. , while Amazon Instant Video owns the streaming rights in Austria and Germany , and will make episodes available online one day after their original airing .
Streaming in the United Kingdom became available to Amazon Prime members in 2016 .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE
Rotten
TomatoesMetacritic SEASON 1 Section::::Season 1 .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the first season has a rating of 78 % , based on 59 reviews , whose average rating is 6.8/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads ,
" Fear the Walking Dead recycles elements of its predecessor , but it 's still moody and engrossing enough to compete with the original . "
On Metacritic , the season has a score of 66 out of 100 , based on 33 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Elisabeth Vincentelli of the New York Post rated the first two episodes three out of four stars , stating that " [ They ] are creepily suspenseful – they're great examples of how effective a slow pace and a moody atmosphere can be . "
Another positive review of the first episode came from Ken Tucker of Yahoo TV , who wrote , " Fear the Walking Dead is a mood piece , more artful than the original series " and that the cast is " terrific " .
Tim Goodman of The Hollywood Reporter gave an average review , writing , " The 90-minute first episode and the hour - long second episode are , while not actually boring , certainly less magnetic than the original . "
One of the harshest negative reviews came from HitFix , on Daniel Fienberg and Alan Sepinwall 's podcast , where Fienberg called the premiere episode " awful , just horrible ... as bad as The Walking Dead has ever gotten at its very worst .
This is that bad .
I 've been kind of stunned to see people being generous to it . ...
I thought this was almost unwatchably bad . "
Sepinwall called his B− review " slightly generous " .
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
The second season received mostly mixed reviews from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the season has a rating of 71 % , based on 29 reviews , whose average rating is 6.6/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads ,
" Fear the Walking Dead sets sail in its sophomore season with an intriguing backdrop that does n't always disguise its deficiencies in comparison to its predecessor . "
On Metacritic , the season has a score of 54 out of 100 , based on 12 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
SEASON 3
Section::::Season 3 .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the third season has an approval rating of 80 % based on 8 reviews , with an average rating of 7.5/10 .
In his season review for IGN , Matt Fowler gave it an 8.2 out of 10 and wrote , " Fear the Walking Dead more solidly found its tone and voice this season by embracing the arid landscape , ramping up the human - on - human conflict , and rallying around Kim Dickens ' anti - hero mom , Madison , as the driving character " and that it is now " a better series overall than The Walking Dead " .
SEASON 4 Section::::Season 4 .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the fourth season has an approval rating of 83 % based on 6 reviews , with an average rating of 7.03/10 .
TVLine reevaluated the series for its fourth season , giving it a grade of a " B+ " .
Reviewer Charlie Mason wrote , " it 's gone from being an adequate stopgap between seasons of The Walking Dead to a show that 's as good or arguably even better than the one from which it was spun off . "
He also praised the addition of Jenna Elfman and Garret Dillahunt and that season 4 has had several genuine surprises in its storytelling .
RATINGS
Section::::Ratings .
The U.S. series premiere attracted 10.1 million total viewers , with 6.3 million in the advertiser - coveted 18-to-49-year - old demographic , both cable television records for a series premiere .
Numerous international debuts of the pilot also set ratings records .
The first season averaged 11.2 million viewers in " live plus-3 " ratings ( includes VOD and DVR viewing within three days after initial telecast ) to become the highest - rated first season of any series in cable history .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
! scope="col " Year ! scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Category ! scope="col " Recipient ! scope="col " Result ! scope="col " class="unsortable " rowspan=42018 16th Visual Effects Society Awards Outstanding Supporting Visual Effects in a Photoreal Episode Peter Crosman , Denise Gayle , Philip Nussbaumer , Martin Pelletier , Frank Ludica for " Sleigh Ride " rowspan=344th
Saturn Awards
Best Horror Television Series Fear
the Walking Dead rowspan=3 Best Performance by a Younger Actor on a Television Series Alycia Debnam - Carey Best Guest - Starring Performance on Television Michael Greyeyes WEB SERIES FEAR THE WALKING DEAD : FLIGHT 462 Section::::Web series .
Section::::Fear
the Walking Dead : Flight 462 .
Fear the Walking Dead :
Flight 462 , a 16-part web series , premiered on October 4 , 2015 , on AMC.com ; it also aired as promos during The Walking Dead season 6 .
Two of the web series ' characters , Alex ( previously known as Charlie ) and Jake , are introduced in Fear the Walking Dead season 2 , episode 3 ( " Ouroboros " ) .
FEAR THE WALKING DEAD : PASSAGE Section::::Fear
the Walking Dead : Passage .
A second 16-part web series debuted on October 17 , 2016 , and episodes were made available online weekly and aired as promos during the seventh season of The Walking Dead .
The web series follows Sierra , a capable survivor , who helps an injured woman named Gabi as they try to find sanctuary .
The series was written by Lauren Signorino and Mike Zunic , and directed by Andrew Bernstein .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The first season was released on Blu - ray and DVD on December 1 , 2015 .
A special edition version of the first season was released on Blu - ray and DVD on March 22 , 2016 , with new bonus features , including deleted scenes , seven featurettes , and audio commentaries by cast and crew , on all six episodes .
The second season , featuring audio commentaries , deleted scenes , and various behind - the - scene featurettes , was released on Blu - ray and DVD on December 13 , 2016 .
The third season , featuring audio commentaries and deleted scenes , was released on Blu - ray and DVD on March 13 , 2018 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS