CREED ( FILM )
Creed is a 2015 American sports drama film directed by Ryan Coogler and written by Coogler and Aaron Covington .
Both a spin - off and sequel in the Rocky film series , the film stars Michael B. Jordan
as Adonis Johnson Creed , Apollo Creed 's son , with Sylvester Stallone reprising the role of Rocky Balboa .
It also features Tessa Thompson , Phylicia Rashad , Tony Bellew and Graham McTavish .
The film reunites Jordan with Fruitvale Station writer - director Coogler , as well as Wood Harris , with whom Jordan had worked on The Wire .
Filming began in Liverpool on January 19 , 2015 , and later also took place in Philadelphia , Rocky 's hometown .
Creed was released in the United States on November 25 , 2015 , the 40th anniversary of the date of the opening scene in 1976 's Rocky .
The seventh installment of the series and sequel to 2006 's Rocky Balboa , the film received acclaim from critics , who called it the best Rocky film in many years , and was chosen by National Board of Review as one of the top ten films of 2015 .
For his performance , Stallone was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor , his first Oscar nomination since the original film .
He also won the National Board of Review Award for Best Supporting Actor , Critics ' Choice Award for Best Supporting Actor and Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor in a Motion Picture .
A sequel , titled Creed II , was released in November 2018 , directed by Steven Caple Jr. PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1998 , Adonis " Donnie " Johnson , the son of an extramarital lover of former heavyweight champion Apollo Creed , is serving time in a Los Angeles youth detention center when Creed 's widow , Mary Anne , visits and offers to take him in .
In 2015 , Donnie resigns from the Smith Boardley Financial Group to pursue his dream of becoming a professional boxer .
Mary Anne vehemently opposes his aspiration , remembering how her husband was killed in the ring by Ivan Drago thirty years ago .
Donnie auditions at Los Angeles ' elite Delphi Boxing Academy , managed by family friend Tony
" Little Duke " Evers Jr. , the son of Rocky 's trainer Tony " Duke " Evers , but is turned down .
Undaunted , Donnie travels to Philadelphia in hopes of getting in touch with his father 's old friend and rival , former heavyweight champion , Rocky Balboa .
Donnie meets Rocky at Rocky 's Italian restaurant , Adrian 's , named in honor of his deceased wife , and asks Rocky to become his trainer .
Rocky is reluctant to return to boxing , having already made a one - off comeback at a very advanced age despite having suffered brain trauma during his career as a fighter .
However , he eventually agrees .
Donnie asks him about the " secret third fight " between him and Apollo just after Apollo helped Rocky regain the heavyweight title , and Rocky reveals that Apollo won .
Donnie trains at the Front Street Gym , with several of Rocky 's longtime friends as cornermen .
He also finds a love interest in Bianca , an up - and - coming singer and songwriter .
Donnie , now known as " Hollywood Donnie " , defeats a local fighter , and word gets out that he is Creed 's illegitimate son .
Rocky receives a call from the handlers of world light heavyweight champion " Pretty " Ricky Conlan , who is being forced into retirement by an impending prison term .
He offers to make Donnie his final challenger — provided that he change his name to Adonis Creed .
Donnie balks at first , wanting to forge his own legacy .
However , he eventually agrees .
While helping Donnie train , Rocky learns he has non - Hodgkin 's lymphoma .
He is unwilling to undergo chemotherapy , remembering that it was not enough to save Adrian when she had ovarian cancer .
His diagnosis and the fact that his best friend and brother - in - law Paulie Pennino — Adrian 's brother — has now died in addition to Adrian , Apollo , and his old trainer , Mickey Goldmill , further force him to confront his own mortality .
Seeing Rocky shaken , Donnie urges him to seek treatment .
Donnie fights Conlan at Goodison Park in Conlan 's hometown of Liverpool , and many parallels emerge between the bout that ensues and Apollo and Rocky 's first fight forty years earlier .
First , before entering the ring , Donnie receives a present from Mary Anne — new American flag trunks similar to the ones Apollo and later Rocky wore .
Additionally , to the surprise of nearly everyone , Donnie gives Conlan all he can handle .
Conlan knocks Donnie down , but Donnie recovers to knock Conlan down for the first time in his career .
Donnie goes the distance , but Conlan wins on a split decision ( just as Apollo retained his title by split decision against Rocky ) .
However , Donnie has won the respect of Conlan and the crowd ; as Max Kellerman puts it while calling the fight for HBO , " Conlan won the fight , but Creed won the night . "
Conlan tells Donnie that he is the future of the light heavyweight division .
The film ends with Donnie and a frail but improving Rocky climbing the 72 steps outside the entrance of the Philadelphia Museum of Art .
CAST
* Michael B. Jordan as Adonis Creed : An underdog but talented light heavyweight boxer and the son of world heavyweight champion Apollo Creed .
He goes by the name Donnie Johnson .
* Alex Henderson as young Adonis Johnson * Sylvester Stallone as Robert " Rocky " Balboa , Sr . : A two - time world heavyweight champion and Apollo 's rival - turned - friend who becomes Adonis ' trainer and mentor .
He owns and operates an Italian restaurant in Philadelphia named after his deceased wife Adrian ( played by Talia Shire in previous films ) .
* Tessa Thompson as Bianca : A singer - songwriter who becomes Adonis ' love interest .
* Phylicia Rashad as Mary Anne Creed : Apollo 's widow and Adonis ' stepmother , who takes in Adonis as a child following the death of Adonis ' biological mother .
Rashad takes over the role originally played by Sylvia Meals who died in 2011 .
* Graham McTavish as Tommy Holiday : Conlan 's trainer .
* Wood Harris as Tony " Little Duke " Evers : One of Danny Wheeler 's assistant trainers .
His father , Tony Evers Sr . ( played by Tony Burton in each preceding Rocky film ) , was a father figure for Apollo and his trainer / manager when Apollo became world heavyweight champion .
He then became one of Rocky 's trainers for his rematch against Clubber Lang and after Apollo 's death .
* Ritchie Coster as Pete Sporino * Tone Trump as himself
* Brian Anthony Wilson as James Section::::Cast .
A number of figures ( real - life fighters and trainers ) from the sport of boxing play roles in the film : * Anthony Bellew as " Pretty " Ricky Conlan :
A highly formidable yet arrogant British boxer and the world light heavyweight champion .
* Andre Ward as Danny " Stuntman " Wheeler : A light heavyweight boxer .
* Gabriel Rosado as Leo
" The Lion " Sporino : A light heavyweight boxer .
* Jacob " Stitch " Duran as himself : An esteemed cutman in both boxing and mixed martial arts , who is recruited by Rocky to be in Adonis ' corner .
He previously portrayed the cutman of Mason " The Line " Dixon ( played by Antonio Tarver ) in Rocky Balboa .
Liev Schreiber voices an HBO 24/7 announcer , while Michael Buffer cameos as himself serving as ring announcer .
Other sports media personalities who appear include ESPN 's Tony Kornheiser , Michael Wilbon , Hannah Storm , and Max Kellerman , and HBO Sports ' boxing announcer Jim Lampley .
Archive footage of Carl Weathers ' Apollo Creed is used multiple times in the film .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
On July 24 , 2013 , it was announced that MGM had signed on with Fruitvale Station director Ryan Coogler to direct a spin - off of Rocky , a seventh film in the Rocky series , which Coogler would also co - write with Aaron Covington .
Sylvester Stallone also worked on the screenplay for the seventh film .
The film would focus on a man following in the footsteps of his late father , Apollo Creed , and getting a mentor in the now - retired Rocky Balboa .
Michael B. Jordan was set for the role of Creed 's son , Adonis Creed , and Stallone was set to reprise his character of Rocky .
Original producers Irwin Winkler and Robert Chartoff would produce , along with Stallone and Kevin King - Templeton .
On April 25 , 2014 , while talking to THR , Coogler stated that he had sent his latest draft to the studio , and confirmed the involvement of Jordan and Stallone .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
On November 10 , real - life boxers Tony Bellew and Andre Ward joined the film , with Bellew to play a fighter , " Pretty " Ricky Conlan , the main opponent for Creed .
Shooting was set to begin in January 2015 , in Las Vegas and Philadelphia .
On December 16 , Tessa Thompson was added to the cast as the female lead .
On January 8 , 2015 , Phylicia Rashad reportedly joined the film to play Mary Anne Creed , Apollo 's widow .
On January 21 , Graham McTavish tweeted about his involvement in the film .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography began on January 19 , 2015 on location at Goodison Park , with the first scene shot taking place during a Barclays Premier League football match between Everton ( of which Stallone and native Evertonian Bellew are fans ) and West Bromwich Albion .
Goodison would later host both the climactic film fight between Donnie and Conlan and also Bellew 's real - life title fight against Ilunga Makabu in May 2016 , which was the first outdoor boxing match in Liverpool since 1949 .
Filming also took place in Philadelphia .
In early February , an empty store in Philadelphia was converted into a boxing gym , where some training scenes were shot .
On February 13 , the crew was spotted filming in the Victor Cafe in South Philadelphia .
The cafe was transformed into the " Adrian 's Restaurant " , and crew were again spotted filming there on February 16 .
Stallone and Jordan were also spotted on the set of the film on February 18 .
From February 24–27 and then on March 3 , filming took place at Sun Center Studios in Aston Township .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The musical score for Creed was written by Swedish composer Ludwig Göransson , who is only the third composer in the history of the Rocky series , following Bill Conti ( Rocky , II , III , V , and Balboa ) and Vince DiCola ( Rocky IV ) .
Creed also features a soundtrack that consists mostly of music new to the series , including hip hop tracks by artists such as Future , Meek Mill , and White Dave .
Both a score and a soundtrack album were released on November 20 , 2015 by WaterTower Music and Atlantic Records , respectively .
One tribute to Conti 's original soundtrack is included – the track " You 're a Creed " uses both " Gon na Fly Now " and " Going the Distance " .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
On February 3 , 2015 , Warner Bros. slated the film to be released domestically on November 25 , 2015 .
This date coincides with the 40th anniversary of the opening scene in the original film , where Rocky fights Spider Rico .
PIRACY Section::::Piracy .
On December 20 , 2015 , screeners of numerous prospective awards contenders , including Creed , were uploaded to torrent sites .
The FBI has linked the case to co - CEO Andrew Kosove of Alcon Entertainment .
Kosove claimed that he had " never seen this DVD " , and that " it never touched his hands " .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Creed grossed $ 109.8 million in North America and $ 63.8 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 173.6 million , against a budget of $ 35 million .
In North America , Creed opened on Wednesday , November 25 , 2015 , alongside The Good Dinosaur and Victor Frankenstein , as well as the expanding wide releases of Brooklyn , Spotlight and Trumbo .
The film was originally projected to gross $ 35 million from 3,404 theaters in its first five days , including $ 20 million in its opening weekend .
However , after grossing $ 1.4 million from its Tuesday night previews ( a record for a Thanksgiving week release ) and $ 6 million on its opening day , five - day projections were increased to $ 39–42 million .
The film ended up grossing $ 42.6 million in its first five days , including $ 30.1 million in its opening weekend , finishing third at the box office .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Creed has received critical acclaim .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 95 % based on 273 reviews , with an average rating of 7.9/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Creed brings the Rocky franchise off the mat for a surprisingly effective seventh round that extends the boxer 's saga in interesting new directions while staying true to its classic predecessors ' roots . "
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 82 out of 100 , based on 42 critics , indicating " universal acclaim " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A " on an A+ to F scale , while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave it an overall positive score of 85 % .
A.V. Wires Herman Dhaliwal gave the film a very positive review , writing , " I will say the film was everything I could have ever wanted and then some .
It 's a film that could have gone so wrong in so many ways so easily , but the results show something that is genuine and inspired .
It takes the smartest possible routes with the story it wants to tell and delivers in basically every way it needed to .
Ryan Coogler cements himself as one of the best rising filmmakers working today , as he crafts an emotional , funny , compelling and uplifting film that is full of strong performances . "
Andrew Barker of Variety stated that the film lives up to the expectation of its predecessors , while forging its own unique path .
He also appreciated the performances of Stallone and Jordan , saying that Stallone deserved credit for taking a chance on young director Coogler , and that his trust had paid off .
He concluded that the director " offered a smart , kinetic , exhilaratingly well - crafted piece of mainstream filmmaking " .
IGN reviewer John Lasser gave the film an 8.5 out of 10 , saying , " Creed is a mirror of Rocky 's story and we have all been watching that unfold on the big screen for decades .
Coogler 's film does nothing to break the mold .
Rather , it shows that the mold exists for a reason .
Jordan delivers a knockout performance , and Stallone does as well .
In the end , we can all only hope that we 'll get to see Adonis on screen for just as long as we 've seen Rocky .
" ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
!
scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Category ! scope="col " Recipient(s ) ! scope="col " Result ! scope="col " class="unsortable " SEQUEL Section::::Sequel .
In January 2016 , Sylvester Stallone and MGM CEO Gary Barber confirmed that a sequel to Creed was in development .
That same month , Stallone posed the possibility of seeing Milo Ventimiglia appear in the sequel , reprising his role as Rocky 's son Robert Balboa from Rocky Balboa .
Ventimiglia previously revealed during the development of Creed that he was open to returning to the franchise , stating , " I 'll tell you what , if they invited me , I 'd love to be there .
If they did n't , I would n't be offended . "
Also that month , it was reported that the sequel 's release was tentatively set for November 2017 , although it was later pushed back to an unconfirmed date .
Development was seemingly delayed by the announcement Coogler had cast Michael B. Jordan in his next film , Marvel 's Black Panther , thus delaying production until both men 's schedules permitted .
A confrontation between Adonis Creed and Ivan Drago was hinted at on Instagram .
Stallone later confirmed that he had finished writing the script for the sequel , which would see Dolph Lundgren reprising his role as Ivan Drago from Rocky IV .
By October 2017 , Stallone stated on his social media page that he would direct the film , however , by December of the same year , Steven Caple Jr. was announced as the director of Creed II .
Boxer Florian Munteanu was cast as Drago 's son .
In an interview on The Ellen DeGeneres Show , Jordan confirmed that Creed II was his next project .
SEE ALSO
* List of black films of the 2010s NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS