MR .
ROBOT Mr. Robot is an American drama thriller television series created by Sam Esmail .
It stars Rami Malek as Elliot Alderson , a cybersecurity engineer and hacker who has social anxiety disorder and clinical depression .
Elliot is recruited by an insurrectionary anarchist known as " Mr. Robot " , played by Christian Slater , to join a group of hacktivists called " fsociety " .
The group aims to destroy all debt records by encrypting the financial data of the largest conglomerate in the world , E Corp. The pilot premiered on multiple online and video on demand services on May 27 , 2015 .
The first season premiered on USA Network on June 24 , 2015 , and the second on July 13 , 2016 .
The 10-episode third season premiered on October 11 , 2017 .
In December 2017 , Mr. Robot was renewed for a fourth season .
In August 2018 , it was confirmed that the fourth season , to air in 2019 and consisting of 12 episodes , will be the final season .
Mr. Robot has received critical acclaim and has been nominated for and won multiple awards , including the Golden Globe for Best Television Drama Series and was recognized with a Peabody Award .
In 2016 , the series received six Emmy nominations , including Outstanding Drama Series with Malek winning for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
The series follows Elliot Alderson , a young man living in New York City , who works at the cyber security company Allsafe as a security engineer .
Constantly struggling with social anxiety disorder , dissociative identity disorder and clinical depression , Elliot 's thought process seems heavily influenced by paranoia and delusion .
He connects to people by hacking them , which often leads him to act as a cyber - vigilante .
He is recruited by a mysterious insurrectionary anarchist known as Mr. Robot and joins his team of hacktivists known as fsociety .
One of their missions is to cancel all consumer debt by destroying the data of one of the largest corporations in the world , E Corp ( which Elliot perceives as Evil Corp ) , which also happens to be Allsafe 's biggest client .
CAST MAIN * Rami Malek as Elliot Alderson , a senior network engineer at Allsafe Cybersecurity and a vigilante hacker .
He has social anxiety disorder and deals with clinical depression and delusions , which cause him to struggle socially and live isolated from other people .
* Carly Chaikin as Darlene Alderson , Elliot 's younger sister , a malware coder and one of the fsociety hackers .
*
Portia Doubleday as Angela Moss , Elliot 's childhood friend and a fellow employee at Allsafe , later PR Manager for
E Corp. * Martin Wallström as Tyrell Wellick , originally the ambitious Senior Vice President of Technology at E Corp and later part of fsociety .
* Christian Slater as Mr. Robot , an insurrectionary anarchist who recruits Elliot into an underground hacker group called fsociety ; and Edward Alderson , Elliot 's father .
* Michael Cristofer as Phillip Price , the CEO of E Corp. ( recurring season 1 ; main season 2–present )
* Stephanie Corneliussen as Joanna Wellick , Tyrell 's wife ( recurring season 1 ; main seasons 2–3 )
* Grace Gummer as Dominique " Dom " DiPierro , an FBI field agent investigating the E Corp hack ( season 2–present ) .
* BD Wong as Whiterose / Zhang , a trans woman cyber - terrorist and head of the Dark Army , as well as China 's Minister of State Security ( recurring seasons 1–2 ; main season 3–present )
* Bobby Cannavale as Irving , a used car salesman who is a Dark Army fixer ( season 3–present ) RECURRING * Michel Gill as Gideon Goddard , CEO of Allsafe Security .
( season 1–3 )
* Gloria Reuben as Krista Gordon , Elliot 's psychiatrist .
* Ben Rappaport as Ollie Parker , Angela 's boyfriend and an employee at Allsafe .
( season 1–2 ) * Ron Cephas Jones as Leslie Romero , a member of fsociety .
( season 1–2 ) * Sunita Mani as Shama " Trenton " Biswas , a member of fsociety .
( season 1–3 )
*
Azhar Khan as Sunil " Mobley " Markesh , a member of fsociety and Bank of E employee .
( season 1–3 )
* Michael Drayer as Francis " Cisco " Shaw , Darlene 's ex - boyfriend who was the U.S. liaison to the Chinese hacker group Dark Army .
( season 1–3 )
* Bruce Altman as Terry Colby , the former CTO of E Corp who is framed by fsociety for a hack attack .
* Brian Stokes Mitchell as Scott Knowles , the CTO of E Corp following Colby 's arrest .
( season 1–2 ) * Sakina Jaffrey as Antara Nayar , Angela 's lawyer .
* Jeremy Holm as Donald " Mr. Sutherland " Hoffman , a hired muscle / driver under Tyrell and Joanna Wellick .
* Vaishnavi Sharma as Magda , Elliot 's mother .
( season 1–2 ) * Aidan Liebman ( season 1–2 ) and Alex Bento ( season 3 ) as Young Elliot .
* Elliot Villar as Fernando Vera , Shayla 's drug supplier and Elliot 's only supply of suboxone who has a unique dangerous philosophy and is obsessed with Shayla and later Elliot .
( season 1 , 3 – )
* Joey Badass as Leon , a new close friend of Elliot and an inmate , as well as an agent for the Dark Army , responsible for Elliot 's safety .
( season 2-present )
*
Omar Metwally as Ernesto Santiago , Dom 's superior at the FBI who also works for the Dark Army to protect Tyrell Wellick .
( season 2–3 )
* Erik Jensen as Frank Cody , a conspiracy theorist and talk show host .
( season 2–present )
* Grant Chang as Grant , Whiterose 's assistant and lover .
( season 2–3 )
* Stephen Lin as Hamburger Man , Elliot 's contact with the Dark Army .
SEASON 1
* Aaron Takahashi as Lloyd Chung , Elliot 's co - worker at Allsafe .
( guest season 2 ) * Frankie Shaw as Shayla Nico , Elliot 's drug dealer and girlfriend .
* Michele Hicks as Sharon Knowles , Scott 's wife .
( guest season 2 ) * Rick Gonzalez as Isaac Vera , Vera 's brother . SEASON 2 * Craig Robinson as Ray Heyworth , a prison warden who secretly runs a Tor routed website involving human trafficking , drugs and weapons .
* Sandrine Holt as Susan Jacobs , an E Corp General Counsel , known as Madame Executioner .
* Chris Conroy as Derek , Joanna 's secret lover who works as a bartender and a DJ .
( guest , season 3 )
* Michael Maize as Lone Star , a Texas native and an off - balanced prison guard and associate of Ray .
* Luke Robertson as RT , Ray 's former system admin who was later killed for revealing the content of Ray 's website to Elliot . SEASON 3 * Rizwan Manji as Norm , Dom 's new partner working with her to investigate the 5/9 hack .
PRODUCTION CONCEPTION AND DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production . Section::::Conception and development .
Esmail , the show 's creator and showrunner , is the credited writer on the vast majority of the episodes .
According to Sam Esmail , he is fascinated by the hacker culture and wanted to make a film about it for around 15 years .
In the production , Esmail consulted experts to give a realistic picture of hacking activities .
Another inspiration for Esmail , who is of Egyptian descent , was the Arab Spring , where young people who were angry at society used social media to bring about a change .
He 's said that Elliot is a " thinly - veiled version " of himself .
Sam Esmail had originally intended Mr. Robot to be a feature film , with the end of the first act being someone finding out that he had a mental disorder while enacting a greater scheme .
However , midway through writing the first act , he found that the script had expanded considerably , and that it had become a script more suited for a television show .
He removed 20 of around 89 pages of the script then written , and used it as the pilot for the series , and what was to have been the end of the first act became the finale of the first season .
Esmail took the script to film and television production company Anonymous Content to see if it could be developed into a television series , which was then picked up by USA Network .
USA Network gave a pilot order to Mr. Robot in July 2014 , and picked it up to series with a 10-episode order in December 2014 .
Production began in New York on April 13 , 2015 .
The pilot premiered on multiple online and video on demand services on May 27 , 2015 , and the series was renewed for a second season before the first season premiered on USA on June 24 , 2015 .
In December 2015 , it was announced that Esmail would direct all episodes in the second season .
In June 2016 , it was announced that the second season 's episode order was increased from 10 to 12 episodes .
The 12-episode second season premiered on July 13 , 2016 .
On August 16 , 2016 , USA renewed Mr. Robot for a third season to air in 2017 .
The third season debuted in October 2017 and consisted of 10 episodes .
All episodes were directed by Sam Esmail , just as in the second season .
On December 13 , 2017 , USA renewed Mr. Robot for a fourth season .
To portray the unusual , often confused worldview of lead character Elliot Alderson , Franklin Peterson , who edited three Mr. Robot episodes in the first season and six in the second season , used creative editing styles that included jump cuts , varied lengths of takes and shuffling scenes around within an episode and sometimes even between episodes .
Esmail encouraged the experimentation as Peterson and his team explored the personality of each character in the editing suite , finding creative ways to tell their stories and maintain their humanity .
TECHNICAL ACCURACY Section::::Technical accuracy .
Mr. Robot has been widely praised for its technical accuracy by numerous cyber security firms and services such as Avast , Panda Security , Avira , Kaspersky , ProtonMail , and bloggers who dissect and comment on the technology and the technical aspects of the show after every episode .
Aside from the pilot episode , Esmail hired Kor Adana ( former network security analyst and forensics manager for Toyota Motor Sales ) , Michael Bazzell ( Security consultant and former FBI Cyber Crimes Task Force agent and investigator ) and James Plouffe ( lead solutions architect at MobileIron )
as his advisors to oversee the technical accuracy of the show .
By the second season , Adana assembled a team of hackers and cyber security experts including Jeff Moss ( founder and director of Black Hat and DEF CON computer security conferences ) , Marc Rogers ( Principal security researcher for Cloudflare and head of security for DEF CON ) , Ryan Kazanciyan ( Chief security architect for Tanium ) and Andre McGregor ( Director of security for Tanium and former FBI Cyber Special agent ) to assist him with the authenticity of the hacks and the technology being used .
Hacking scenes are then performed by members of the technical team in real life , recorded and rebuilt using Flash animation .
Animation process is carried out by animator Adam Brustein under the direct supervision of Kor Adana himself .
INFLUENCES Section::::Influences .
Sam Esmail has acknowledged several major influences on the show , such as American Psycho , Taxi Driver , A Clockwork Orange , and The Matrix .
In particular , Esmail credited Fight Club as the inspiration for a main character who has dissociative identity disorder creating a new manifestation of his deceased father in the form of a hacker , as well as for the anti - consumerist , anti - establishment , and anti - capitalism spirit of its characters .
Commentators have also noted the parallel in its plot on the erasing of consumer debt records to the film .
Even so , Lauren Lawson for GQ remarked , " Mr. Robot elevates the Fight Club formula : the show 's mindfuckery lubes us up to think about society ( Elliot 's and ours ) in a discerning way , but it 's not the main event .
You can see Fight Club once and pretty much get the picture , but it will take years of scholarly binge - watching to answer the questions Mr. Robot raises . "
In an interview , Esmail explains how playing the song that David Fincher used to underscore the climax of Fight Club
( " Where Is My Mind ? " )
when Elliot initiates the hack in episode nine is intended as a message to the audience that he is aware of the inspiration they took from the film .
The narration by the protagonist was influenced by Taxi Driver , and other influences mentioned included Risky Business in its music score , Blade Runner for the character development , and the television series Breaking Bad for the story arc .
FILMING LOCATIONS
Section::::Filming locations .
The series is filmed in New York .
Filming locations include Silvercup Studios and Coney Island , which serves as the exterior of the base of operations for the hacking group fsociety .
As the production crew was unable to shut down Times Square for filming , the scenes at Times Square in the first - season finale were shot late at night just before the 4th of July holiday weekend to catch the area at its emptiest while other shots were done on sets .
Production on the second season began on March 7 , 2016 , resuming filming in New York City .
AFTERSHOWS Section::::Aftershows .
In June 2016 , USA Network announced Hacking Robot , a live aftershow hosted by Andy Greenwald to air during the second season .
Hacking Robot debuted after the second - season premiere and aired again following the tenth episode .
In addition , a weekly web - only aftershow titled Mr. Robot Digital After Show premiered on The Verge and USA Network 's websites after the third episode , and has continued through the third season .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE
Rotten
TomatoesMetacritic SEASON 1
Section::::Season 1 .
The first season of Mr. Robot received critical acclaim .
On Rotten Tomatoes , it has a rating of 98 % , based on 57 reviews , with an average rating of 8.36/10 .
The site 's consensus reads , " Mr. Robot is a suspenseful cyber - thriller with timely stories and an intriguing , provocative premise .
" It set a record on Rotten Tomatoes as the only show to earn perfect episode scores for an entire season since the site began tracking television episodes .
On Metacritic , the first season scored 79 out of 100 , based on 24 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Merrill Barr of Forbes gave it a very positive review , writing , " Mr. Robot has one of the best kick - offs to any series in a while " and that it " could be the series that finally , after years of ignorance , puts a deserving network among the likes of HBO , AMC and FX in terms of acclaim . "
In The New York Times , Alessandra Stanley noted that " Occupy Wall Street , the protest movement that erupted in 2011 , did n't do much to curb the financial industry .
It did n't die out , though .
It went Hollywood " , before finding Mr. Robot to be , " an intriguing new series ... a cyber - age thriller infused with a dark , almost nihilistic pessimism about the Internet , capitalism and income inequality .
And that makes it kind of fun " .
The UK
The Daily Telegraph reviewer
Michael Hogan gave the show five stars , finding it to be " The Matrix meets Fight Club meets Robin Hood " , noting that , " bafflingly , it took months for a UK broadcaster to snap up the rights " .
Although Hogan found too much attention was devoted to Elliot 's social anxiety , he eventually decided that " this alienated anti - hero was a brilliant , boldly complex character .
" Overall , Hogan concluded that the show deserved to find an audience in the UK .
Mr. Robot made several critics ' list for the best TV shows of 2015 .
Three critics , Jeff Jensen of Entertainment Weekly , Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone , and the staff of TV Guide , named it the best show of the year .
The series also placed second on the list from three other critics , and was named among the best of the year from four other critics .
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
The second season also received critical acclaim .
On Rotten Tomatoes , it has a score of 92 % , based on 35 reviews , with an average rating of 8.05/10 .
The site 's consensus reads : " Unique storytelling , a darker tone , and challenging opportunities for its tight cast push Mr. Robot even further into uncharted television territory . "
On Metacritic , it has a score of 81 out of 100 , based on 28 critics , indicating " universal acclaim " .
Sonia Saraiya of Variety praised Rami Malek 's performance and wrote , " it 's Malek 's soulful eyes and silent pathos that give Mr. Robot its unexpected warmth , as the viewer is lured into Elliot 's chaos and confusion .
Tim Goodman of The Hollywood Reporter lauded Sam Esmail 's direction , writing " Esmail 's camerawork — characters tucked into corners of the frame , among other nontraditional compositions — continues to give the sense of disorientation and never feels tired " and " there are some flourishes in the first two hours that are brilliantly conceived and [ ... ] contribute to what is one of the most visually remarkable hours on television . "
SEASON 3
Section::::Season 3 .
The third season also received critical acclaim .
On Rotten Tomatoes , it has a score of 92 % , based on 17 reviews , with an average rating of 8.25/10 .
On Metacritic , it has a score of 82 out of 100 , based on 9 critics , indicating " universal acclaim " .
Based on six episodes for review , Darren Franich of Entertainment Weekly gave it an " A " grade , calling it a " noir masterpiece " , and overall , wrote that " Season 3 of Mr. Robot is a masterpiece , ballasting the global ambitions of season 2 while sharpening back to the meticulous build of season 1 . " RATINGS AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS 2015
SXSW Film Audience Award Audience Award for Best Episodic rowspan="3"Mr .
Robot 25th
Gotham Independent Film Awards
Breakthrough Series –
Long Form 2015 American Film Institute Awards Television Programs of the Year rowspan="31 " 2016 42nd
People 's Choice Awards Favorite Cable TV Actor
Christian Slater
rowspan="3"20th
Satellite Awards Best Drama Series Mr. Robot rowspan="3 " Best Actor in a Drama Series Rami Malek
Best Supporting Actor in a Series , Miniseries or TV Film Christian Slater
rowspan="2"68th
Writers Guild of America Awards rowspan="2"Kyle Bradstreet , Kate Erickson , Sam Esmail , David Iserson , Randolph Leon , Adam Penn ,
Matt Pyken rowspan="2 "
22nd Screen Actors Guild Awards
Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Drama Series
Rami Malek rowspan="3"73rd
Golden Globe Awards Best Television Series – Drama Mr. Robot rowspan="3
" Best Actor – Television Series Drama Rami Malek Best Supporting Actor – Series , Miniseries or Television Film Christian Slater rowspan="4"6th Critics ' Choice Television Awards Best Drama Series Mr. Robot rowspan="4 " Best Actor in a Drama Series Rami Malek Best Guest Performer in a Drama Series
BD Wong Best Supporting Actor in a Drama Series Christian Slater rowspan="2"Dorian Awards TV Drama of the Year Mr. Robot rowspan="2 " TV Performance of the Year – Actor Rami Malek 42nd Saturn Awards
Best Action - Thriller Television Series rowspan="5"Mr .
Robot 75th
Peabody Awards Peabody Award rowspan="4"32nd
TCA Awards Program of the Year rowspan="4 "
Outstanding Achievement in Drama Outstanding New Program Individual Achievement in Drama Rami Malek rowspan="6"68th Primetime Emmy Awards Outstanding Drama Series Mr. Robot rowspan="6 " Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series Rami Malek in " eps1.0 hellofriend.mov
" Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series Sam Esmail for " eps1.0 hellofriend.mov " Outstanding Music Composition for a Series Mac Quayle for " eps1.0 hellofriend.mov " Outstanding Casting for a Drama Series Susie Farris , Beth Bowling , Kim Miscia
Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Comedy or Drama Series ( One - Hour ) John W. Cook II , Bill Freesh , Timothia Sellers , Andrew Morgado
rowspan="3"7th Critics ' Choice Television Awards Best Drama Series
Mr. Robot rowspan="3 " Best Actor in a Drama Series Rami Malek
Best Supporting Actor in a Drama Series
Christian Slater rowspan="2"74th
Golden Globe Awards
Best
Actor –
Television Series Drama Rami Malek rowspan="2 " Best Supporting Actor – Series , Miniseries or Television Film Christian Slater
23rd Screen Actors Guild Awards
Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Drama Series Rami Malek 67th ACE Eddie Awards Best Edited One Hour Series for Commercial Television Philip Harrison for " eps2.4m4ster-s1ave.aes " rowspan="2"21st Satellite Awards Best Drama Series Mr. Robot rowspan="2 " Best Actor in a Drama Series Rami Malek Society of Camera Operators
Awards Camera Operator of the Year – Television Aaron Medick 43rd
Saturn Awards
Best Action / Thriller Television Series Mr. Robot 2017
MTV Movie & TV Awards Best Fight Against the System Mr. Robot rowspan="4"69th Primetime Emmy Awards Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series BD Wong rowspan="4 " Outstanding Cinematography for a Single - Camera Series ( One Hour )
Tod Campbell for " eps2.0_unm4sk - pt1.tc"/"eps2.0_unm4sk - pt2.tc " Original Creative Achievement in Interactive Media within a Scripted Program
The Mr. Robot Virtual Reality Experience Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Comedy or Drama Series ( One Hour ) John W. Cook II , Bill Freesh , William Sarokin , Paul Drenning for " eps2.8_h1dden - pr0cess.axx " 75th
Golden Globe Awards
Best Supporting Actor – Series , Miniseries or Television Film Christian Slater 8th Critics ' Choice Television Awards
Best Supporting Actor in a Drama Series Bobby Cannavale 16th Visual Effects Society Awards Outstanding Supporting Visual Effects in a Photoreal Episode Ariel Altman , Lauren Montuori , John Miller , Luciano DiGeronimo for " eps3.4_runtime - err0r.r00 " rowspan="3"70th Primetime Emmy Awards Original Creative Achievement in Interactive Media within a Scripted Program Mr. Robot :
Ecoin rowspan="3 " Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Comedy or Drama Series ( One Hour ) John W. Cook II , Bill Freesh , Joe White , Paul Drenning for " eps3.4_runtime - error.r00 " Outstanding Special Visual Effects in a Supporting Role Ariel Altman , Lauren Montuori , Joe Gunn , John Miller , Brian Kubovcik , Luciano DiGeronimo , Lindsay Seguin , Greg Anderson , John - Michael Buban for " eps3.4_runtime - error.r00 "
CRITICS ' TOP TEN LISTS
*
No . 1 Entertainment Weekly
*
No . 1
Complex
*
No . 1 Rolling Stone
*
No .
1 TV Fanatic
*
No .
1 TV Guide
*
No .
1 NPR *
No .
2 IGN
*
No . 2 TV Insider
*
No . 5 Time
* No .
5 TV.com
*
No . 6 Business Insider
*
No . 6
The Hollywood Reporter
*
No . 6 New York Post
*
No . 7
Adweek
*
No .
7 Uproxx
*
No . 8
TheWrap
*
No . 10 USA Today
* — The Atlantic * — Associated Press * — Maxim * — Variety * — Vanity Fair * — Vogue * —
Wired
*
No . 3
Hidden Remote
*
No . 5 Complex
* No . 6 Tulsa World
*
No . 10
IndieWire * — Newsweek IN OTHER MEDIA Section::::In other media .
Mr. Robot has spawned a variety of video games .
Its mobile game , titled : Mr. Robot:1.51exfiltrati0n.apk is set during the first season of the series and was published by Telltale Games .
Users play as a fictional character who has stumbled upon the phone of an important member of fsociety
and it 's up to the player to assist them in bringing down
E Corp. The Mr. Robot Virtual Reality Experience , written and directed by Sam Esmail , is a 13-minute video viewable using virtual reality headsets that explores Elliot 's past .
Mr. Robot also features several Easter eggs , including websites related to the show or IP addresses used within the series that redirect to real websites .
A book tie - in , Mr. Robot : Red Wheelbarrow ( eps1.91_redwheelbarr0w.txt ) written by Sam Esmail and Courtney Looney , was released on November 1 , 2016 .
RELEASE
BROADCAST Section::::Release .
Section::::Broadcast .
Mr. Robot premiered in the United States on USA Network on June 24 , 2015 , and in Canada on Showcase on September 4 , 2015 .
Amazon.com secured broadcasting rights in the United Kingdom , with the first season added on Amazon Prime on October 16 , 2015 , and second - season episodes to be released immediately after initial broadcast in the United States .
In Australia , the series premiered on Presto on August 14 , 2015 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Universal Studios Home Entertainment released the first three seasons on DVD and Blu - ray .
The first season was released on January 12 , 2016 .
It contains all 10 episodes , plus deleted scenes , gag reel , making - of featurette , and UltraViolet digital copies of the episodes .
The second season was released on January 10 , 2017 .
The third season was released on March 27 , 2018 .
In September 2015 , Amazon.com acquired exclusive streaming VOD rights to Mr. Robot in several countries , with the first season becoming available to stream in June 2016 for U.S. Amazon Prime subscribers .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS