SCREAM ( TV SERIES )
Scream is an American anthology slasher television series developed by Jill Blotevogel , Dan Dworkin and Jay Beattie for MTV and is based on the slasher film series of the same name created by Kevin Williamson and Wes Craven .
The series is produced by Dimension Television and MTV Production Development , and was formerly filmed in Louisiana , in locations such as Baton Rouge and New Orleans as well as Chalmette High School .
Blotevogel and Jaime Paglia originally served as showrunners during the first season before being replaced by Michael Gans and Richard Register in the second season , because of creative differences .
The first two seasons were situated in the fictional town of Lakewood , where a string of murders took place .
At the center of those murders was Emma Duval ( played by Willa Fitzgerald ) , a teenage girl who is somehow tied to the town 's dark past .
The series premiered on June 30 , 2015 on MTV and concluded its first season on September 1 , 2015 .
The series was officially picked up for a second season on July 29 , 2015 .
It was announced the series would air a two - hour Halloween special on October 18 , 2016 .
Though technically not an international co - production , the series does air globally as a " Netflix Original " title , due to Netflix having exclusive international distribution rights to the series .
On October 14 , 2016 , MTV renewed the series for a six - episode third season , which is scheduled to premiere in 2018 .
On April 26 , 2017 , MTV announced that they were rebooting the series with the third season , with a new cast and setting .
As part of the reboot process , it was revealed that Brett Matthews would be serving as the main showrunner .
In addition , Queen Latifah , Shakim Compere and Yaneley Arty would be added as executive producers for the series under Flavor Unit Entertainment .
Tyga , C.J. Wallace , Keke Palmer , Giorgia Whigham , RJ Cyler , Jessica Sula , Giullian Yao Gioiello , and Tyler Posey will star in the rebooted third season .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
After a cyber - bullying incident serves as the catalyst for a brutal murder , a group of teenagers become the prime targets of a serial killer , as dark secrets from Lakewood 's troubled past resurface and conjure memories of a similar murder that occurred 20 years earlier in the community .
Emma Duval , a teenage girl who is somehow linked to the town 's past , is the killer 's main obsession and the center of these grisly murders .
With both her family and friends in apparent danger , she sets out to uncover the town 's dark mysteries and unmask the killer once and for all .
This proves difficult , however , especially when everyone is a suspect and anyone could be a victim .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* Willa Fitzgerald as Emma Duval , a popular high school student and daughter of Maggie Duval ( seasons 1–2 )
* Bex Taylor - Klaus as Audrey Jensen , a sarcastic , bicurious filmmaker and Emma 's best friend ( seasons 1–2 ) * John Karna as Noah Foster , a witty and intelligent nerd who is extremely knowledgeable about horror films ( seasons 1–2 ) * Amadeus Serafini as Kieran Wilcox , a new student living with his father who becomes Emma 's main love interest ( seasons 1–2 ) * Connor Weil as Will Belmont , Emma 's ex - boyfriend , and Jake Fitzgerald 's best friend ( season 1 )
* Carlson Young as Brooke Maddox , a beautiful , rich but troubled girl who is Emma 's best friend ( seasons 1–2 )
* Jason Wiles as Clark Hudson , the former sheriff of Lakewood ( season 1 ) * Tracy Middendorf as Maggie Duval , Emma 's mother and the medical examiner ( seasons 1–2 )
* Kiana Brown as Zoe Vaughn , fellow high school student , a driven overachiever who harbors a secret and was Noah 's love interest ( season 2 ) * Santiago Segura as Gustavo " Stavo " Acosta , a high school student and the son of Sheriff Acosta .
He is a skilled artist who is deeply into horror , serial killers and comic books .
( season 2 )
* RJ Cyler as Deion Elliot , a star running back for the high school football team ( season 3 )
* Jessica Sula as Liv Tyler , a member of the cheer squad and an honor roll student ( season 3 )
* Keke Palmer as Kym Williams , a rebel with a thousand causes ; she is a bold and beautiful social activist ( season 3 ) * Giorgia Whigham as Beth Cooper , the resident goth girl and a local tattoo artist ( season 3 ) *
Tyga as Jamal Elliot , Deion 's step - brother .
He has a big heart and is undyingly loyal to Deion .
( season 3 )
* C.J. Wallace as Amir Sanchéz , a good kid with strict parents who demand he stay away from girls and work in the family business ( season 3 )
* Giullian Yao Gioiello as Manny Giallo , a smart , openly gay guy who is loyal to a fault and usually the smartest person in the room ( season 3 )
* Tyler Posey as Shane Harper , a high school dropout .
He is a drug dealer and party promoter .
( season 3 )
RECURRING
* Brianne Tju as Riley Marra , Emma 's friend who takes an interest in Noah ( season 1 ) * Mike Vaughn as The Killer ( voice ) ( seasons 1–2 ) * Amelia Rose Blaire as Piper Shaw , a podcaster who comes to Lakewood to investigate the recent murders ( season 1 ; guest season 2 )
* Tom Maden as Jake Fitzgerald , Brooke 's boyfriend and Will Belmont 's best friend ( seasons 1–2 )
* Bobby Campo as Seth Branson , a teacher who had a secret relationship with Brooke ( seasons 1–2 ) * Bryan Batt as Mayor Quinn Maddox , Brooke 's father and the mayor of Lakewood , who is revealed to be hiding secrets from the town about illegal business deals and cover ups ( seasons 1–2 ) * Sosie Bacon as Rachel Murray , Audrey 's ex - girlfriend .
She has suicidal inclinations .
( season 1 ; guest season 2 )
* Sophina Brown as Detective Lorraine Brock , a detective assigned to Nina Patterson 's murder case ( season 1 ) * Tom Everett Scott as Kevin Duval , Emma 's estranged father and Maggie 's ex - husband ( season 2 ; guest season 1 )
* Anthony Ruivivar as Sheriff Miguel Acosta , an outspoken , competent and experienced cop who returns to his childhood home of Lakewood .
He is a devoted , if sometimes strict , family man who is very protective of his son , Stavo .
( season 2 )
* Austin Highsmith as Kristen Lang , an idealistic high school psychology teacher who becomes a confidant and mentor to her students ( season 2 ) * Sean Grandillo as Eli Hudson , Kieran 's cousin .
He presents a squeaky clean image , but may have ulterior motives .
His arrival in Lakewood brings along secrets of Kieran 's past that were buried long ago .
He takes an interest in Emma .
( season 2 )
* Karina Logue as Tina Hudson , Eli 's mother and Kieran 's legal guardian .
She is proper and polite but with a grifter 's sense of self - reliance .
( season 2 )
* Mary Katherine Duhon as Haley Meyers , a classmate from high school who dislikes Emma and her friends ( season 2 )
* Mary J. Blige as Sherry Elliot , Deion 's mother ( season 3 )
EPISODES
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
In June 2012 , it was reported that MTV was in the early stages of developing a weekly television series based on the Scream film franchise .
In April 2013 , The Hollywood Reporter confirmed that MTV had greenlit the pilot episode , with Wes Craven in talks to direct .
In July 2013 , it was reported that Jay Beattie and Dan Dworkin had officially boarded the project to write the pilot script and in April 2014 , it was reported by TVLine that the series would be penned by Jill Blotevogel .
In August 2014 , the series announced its cast as well as the director of the pilot episode , Jamie Travis .
The series was originally planned to debut in mid-2014 , however , this was changed to summer 2015 .
On April 12 , 2015 , the first trailer for the series was aired during the 2015 MTV Movie Awards presented by Bella Thorne , also revealing the series 's June 30 , 2015 premiere date .
On November 9 , 2015 , it was announced that Jill Blotevogel and Jaime Paglia would be stepping down as showrunners due to creative differences , although Blotevogel would remain a consultant on the series .
Michael Gans and Richard Register replaced them for the second season .
The second - season premiere date was changed to May 30 , 2016 .
On October 14 , 2016 , MTV renewed the series for a six - episode third season , and announced that the showrunners would be replaced again .
On April 26 , 2017 , MTV announced that Queen Latifah would be an executive producer for the third season of Scream .
The series will undergo a reboot with a new cast and Brett Matthews serving as showrunner .
In addition , it was announced that Shakim Compere and Yaneley Arty would also be credited as executive producers for the series under Flavor Unit Entertainment .
On July 19 , 2017 , Hollywood Reporter announced that the series would transition into an anthology series in the third season .
This information was corroborated by MTV president Chris McCarthy .
On September 18 , 2017 , it was announced that the Ghostface mask from the film series would be making an appearance in the third season .
On October 10 , 2017 , Keke Palmer confirmed in an interview that Roger L. Jackson , who voiced Ghostface in the film series , would return for the third season , replacing Mike Vaughn , who served as the voice for The Killer in the first two seasons .
On March 28 , 2018 , it was confirmed that Harvey Weinstein would not be credited as an executive producer in the third season .
In addition , the series would not include The Weinstein Company or its logo in its credits from the third season onward , even though the company was formerly involved in the distribution of the series .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
On August 5 , 2014 , both the main cast and recurring cast were announced .
However , Amy Forsyth dropped out and was replaced by Bex Taylor - Klaus .
On February 22 , 2015 , it was revealed that Joel Gretsch , who was playing Clark Hudson , had left the series as producers thought his character should go down a different path ; he was replaced by Jason Wiles .
On December 11 , 2014 , it was revealed that Bella Thorne would be a part of the cast .
Thorne confirmed this during an interview saying , " Yes it 's true .
I will re - enact the famous scene of Drew Barrymore in the original series . "
On April 22 , 2015 , True Blood actress Amelia Rose Blaire was confirmed to be joining the series as Piper Shaw which , by the character description , is a role similar to Gale Weathers from the Scream films .
On June 18 , 2015 , Bella Thorne confirmed she was offered the lead role in the series but turned it down in favor of a smaller role .
She went on to explain , " I had the option to do the lead , but I thought I should choose this role because I felt it was more iconic
, I thought it was just a little bit more and also I 've never been killed on screen before .
I 've never been killed ever on anything that I 've done .
I 've always been the character that lives at the end
so it was my first time dying on screen which is pretty cool .
I would n't say that my character is n't necessarily in any more of the episodes but you 'll see ! "
It was announced on July 17 , 2017 , that Tyga and C.J. Wallace would star in the rebooted third season .
On September 13 , 2017 , it was announced that RJ Cyler , Jessica Sula , Keke Palmer , Giullian Yao Gioiello , and Giorgia Whigham had joined the main cast of the third season in addition to the previously announced cast members .
On September 25 , 2017 , it was announced that Tyler Posey had been cast as a series regular in the third season .
On August 16 , 2018 , it was announced that Mary J. Blige had been cast in the role of Deion 's mother , Sherry Elliot .
On October 12 , 2018 , it was announced that Tony Todd would appear in the third season .
FILMING Section::::Filming .
For the first two seasons , the series was filmed in Baton Rouge , Louisiana .
Filming of season one took place from April through July 2015 .
Filming for the second season began on February 16 , 2016 .
Filming for the third season began on September 18 , 2017 and concluded on November 11 , 2017 , in Atlanta , Georgia .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Two official soundtrack albums have been released by MTV .
The first season 's soundtrack was released on August 14 , 2015 under Columbia Records .
The second season 's soundtrack was released on July 29 , 2016 under Island Records .
SCREAM AFTER DARK !
Section::::Scream After Dark !
Scream After Dark !
is a talk show hosted by Jeffery Self , which features behind the scenes footage , and guests discussing episodes of Scream .
The first instalment followed the season two premiere and featured Willa Fitzgerald , Bex Taylor - Klaus , John Karna , Amadeus Serafini , Carlson Young , and Kiana Brown , and received 185,000 viewers .
The second instalment aired following episode eight and featured Fitzgerald , Taylor - Klaus , Karna , Young , Brown , Santiago Segura , and Sean Grandillo , and received 201,000 viewers .
The third and final installment aired following the season two finale and featured Fitzgerald , Taylor - Klaus , Karna , Young , and Serafini , and averaged 145,000 viewers .
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
On October 1 , 2015 , the entire first season of Scream became available to stream instantly on Netflix worldwide except in the United States .
On May 13 , 2016 , the first season of Scream became available on Netflix in the United States .
The streaming service started to broadcast the second season weekly on May 31 , 2016 , with a one - day delay with respect to the original United States broadcast .
On September 30 , 2016 , the second season of Scream became available on Netflix in the United States .
Netflix has first - run streaming rights for the series in the UK and Ireland , airing the series a day after the initial broadcast .
On July 17 , 2018 , Hollywood Reporter confirmed that in the midst of Lantern Capital 's acquisition of the assets of The Weinstein Company , a former output deal between The Weinstein Company and Netflix was terminated .
As a result , Netflix will likely not stream the third season on their platform .
On October 16 , 2018 , it was confirmed that Lantern Entertainment and Netflix settled a contract dispute with the terms of the deal left undisclosed to the public .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
Rotten
TomatoesMetacritic
The first season of Scream has received an overall mixed response .
On review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes , the first season received a rating of 47 % , based on 30 reviews , with a 5.4/10 average rating .
The site 's critical consensus reads : " Lacking truly compelling characters or scenarios , Scream is formed to trade too heavily on nostalgia for its big - screen predecessors in the franchise . "
On Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating , the first season has a score of 57 out of 100 , based on reviews from 20 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
In a positive review , David Hinckley from New York Daily News awarded the pilot four out of five stars and stated , " Happily , Scream maintains a sense of humor , reinforced with snappy , self - aware pop culture dialogue . "
Similarly , Brian Lowry of Variety commended the series ' ability to maintain suspense " without much actually happening during the rest of the episode , " noting its use of music , but expressing skepticism if the series could maintain its originality .
Aedan Juvet of PopWrapped gave a positive assessment of the series and called it , " a prime example of a game - changing horror series " .
Conversely , David Wiegand of the San Francisco Chronicle panned the series and gave it one out of four stars , criticizing the acting performances as " bland , robotic , and uninteresting " as well as its apparent lack of racial diversity .
In a mixed review , Mark Perigard of the Boston Herald gave the series a C+ , saying , " There are a few scares here , but while the Scream films kept audiences jumping , Scream : The TV series risks putting viewers to sleep . "
The second season received more positive reviews with a rating of 83 % on Rotten Tomatoes based off reviews from 6 critics .
RATINGS AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
! scope="col " Year ! scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Category ! scope="col " Recipient ! scope="col " Result !
scope="col " class="Unsortable " rowspan=32015 rowspan=3Teen
Choice Awards REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Scream on Netflix