10 CLOVERFIELD LANE 10 Cloverfield Lane is a 2016 American psychological horror film directed by Dan Trachtenberg , produced by J. J. Abrams and Lindsey Weber and written by Josh Campbell , Matthew Stuecken and Damien Chazelle .
The film stars Mary Elizabeth Winstead , John Goodman , and
John Gallagher Jr. It is the second installment in the Cloverfield franchise .
The film was developed from a script titled The Cellar , but under production by Bad Robot , it was turned into a spiritual successor to the 2008 film Cloverfield .
The film follows a young woman who , after a car crash , wakes up in an underground bunker with two men who insist that an event has left the surface of Earth uninhabitable .
The film is presented in a third - person narrative , in contrast to its predecessor 's found - footage style .
It was released in the United States on March 11 , 2016 , in conventional and IMAX format .
The film received positive reviews , with many praising the performances of the cast , as well as the film 's tense and suspenseful atmosphere ; it grossed $ 110 million worldwide .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
After breaking up with her boyfriend Ben , Michelle drives away from New Orleans .
While in rural Louisiana , she hears news reports of blackouts in several major cities before she is sideswiped by a truck and knocked off the road , falling unconscious .
Michelle wakes in a locked room within an underground bunker
, her wounds tended to .
Howard , the bunker 's owner , tells her he brought her there for her protection , claiming that the air outside has been poisoned by nuclear or chemical fallout from an unknown force .
Michelle is initially hostile towards Howard , but once she has calmed down , Howard takes her on a tour of the well - stocked bunker , and she meets Emmett , another survivor who found his way to it .
Howard takes her to the viewport of the bunker 's exit hatch , showing her two dead pigs outside as evidence of the fallout ; Michelle also sees Howard 's truck , and recognizes it from the accident .
Michelle privately relays her concerns about Howard 's motivations to Emmett .
During their first dinner together , Michelle secretly takes Howard 's keys and makes her way to the hatch , but as she is about to open it , a woman , Leslie , covered in skin lesions , slams against the window demanding she be let in , then collapses .
Michelle openly returns the keys and agrees that Howard was right .
Howard admits to accidentally hitting her car in his panic to get to the shelter .
While the trio 's relationship becomes more relaxed , Howard still shows intolerance towards Emmett and treats Michelle as a little girl ; however , Howard opens up about his daughter who he states is " not with us anymore " .
Howard enlists Michelle to fix the air filtration unit when it fails since she is small enough to fit through the vents ; while repairing it , she finds a locked skylight , with the word " HELP " scratched into its glass and visible to anyone outside .
Further suspicious of Howard , Michelle and Emmett discover that Howard 's purported daughter was a young girl who had gone missing about two years earlier , and they suspect he abducted her to the bunker .
They make plans to escape the bunker , creating a makeshift Hazmat suit behind Howard 's back .
When Howard discovers tools and parts missing , he accuses the two of stealing them , threatening to immerse them in a barrel of perchloric acid .
When Emmett takes sole responsibility , Howard coldly kills Emmett with a gun .
In shock , Michelle is desperately making final preparations to leave , when she is surprised by Howard .
She manages to escape from him with the suit .
En route , she knocks over the acid barrel , which starts an electrical fire in the bunker .
It later explodes , killing Howard .
Michelle dons the suit and escapes the burning bunker onto Howard 's homestead .
Seeing signs of living wildlife , she takes off the suit 's helmet , but then she suddenly sees a giant biomechanical alien spacecraft , drawn by the bunker fire .
A quadrupedal creature drops from the craft and chases Michelle , forcing her to hide in a shed .
She then races towards the farmhouse , but the craft appears and emits a green gas that forces Michelle back into the suit .
Her delay allows mechanical appendages from the ship to capture her , but she is able to craft a Molotov cocktail from items in Howard 's truck to throw into the ship .
The fireball causes the appendage to drop her , and she is able to take the dead woman 's car and escape .
As she nears the Texas border she hears radio chatter instructing any survivors to head to Baton Rouge to evacuate , but also requesting the help of any able - bodied person in Houston .
At a crossroads , she pauses a moment before driving off towards Houston .
In the distance , two larger alien crafts can be seen in the sky .
CAST
* Mary Elizabeth Winstead as Michelle
* John Goodman as Howard Stambler
* John Gallagher Jr. as Emmett DeWitt * Suzanne Cryer as Leslie * Bradley Cooper as Ben ( voice )
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
10 Cloverfield Lane originated from an " ultra low budget " spec script penned by Josh Campbell and Matt Stuecken , titled The Cellar .
The Tracking Board included the script in " The Hit List " of 2012 – an annually published list of spec scripts written within the year that have impressed its voting members .
In 2012 , Paramount Pictures bought the script and commenced further development under Bad Robot Productions for Insurge Pictures , Paramount 's specialty label for films with a micro - budget .
When Bad Robot became involved , the film was assigned the codename Valencia to keep exact details of the production a secret .
Damien Chazelle was brought in to rewrite Campbell and Stuecken 's draft and direct the film .
Chazelle dropped out from directing when his Whiplash project received funding .
On April 3 , 2014 , it was reported production for Valencia was greenlit to begin in the fall of 2014 , under the direction of Dan Trachtenberg with the latest draft being written by an uncredited Daniel Casey .
A budget of about $ 5 million was reported to be expected , in keeping with the mandate of Paramount 's Insurge division of producing micro - budgeted films .
On July 8 , 2014 , Variety reported John Goodman was in negotiations to star in the film .
On August 25 , 2014 , they reported Mary Elizabeth Winstead had entered negotiations , and on September 22 , 2014 , John Gallagher Jr. reportedly joined the cast .
During production , the filmmakers noticed core similarities to Cloverfield , and decided to make the picture what Abrams calls " a blood relative " or " spiritual successor " of that film .
" The spirit of it , the genre of it , the heart of it , the fear factor , the comedy factor , the weirdness factor , there were so many elements that felt like the DNA of this story were of the same place that Cloverfield was born out of , " said Abrams .
In other interviews he explained : " Those characters and that monster [ from Cloverfield ] are not in this movie , but there are other characters and other monsters , " and " This movie is very purposefully not called Cloverfield 2 , because it 's not Cloverfield 2 , [ ... ]
So if you 're approaching it as a literal sequel , you 'll be surprised to see what this movie is .
But while it 's not what you might expect from a movie that has the name Cloverfield in it , I think you 'll find that you 'll understand the connection when you see the whole thing . "
Winstead and Gallagher mentioned that during production they were aware that the film had thematic similarities to Cloverfield , but did not learn that there would be an official connection until they were informed of the chosen title , only a few days before the release of the trailer .
Abrams came up with the title after finishing .
In a March 2015 interview , a few months after production wrapped , Winstead was asked about her experience during Valencia and described it as a " really contained film " , reiterating the premise of The Cellar about a woman being trapped with her mysterious savior in a supposed post - nuclear fallout world .
Later in the month , Insurge Pictures was reported to have been dismantled and its staff absorbed by its parent company .
Insurge 's only film that had yet to be released was reported to be Valencia .
Speaking of rewrites that took place during production , Winstead called them " nothing that was major " .
During an interview with Abrams to promote 10 Cloverfield Lane , he said the creative team behind the original had some ideas on developing Cloverfield 2 , but the release of films such as Godzilla and Pacific Rim led them to abandon them as they found the concept of kaiju films played out .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography on the film began on October 20 , 2014 in New Orleans , Louisiana .
Filming took place in chronological order on only one set .
Scenes involving explosions , fire , and smoke were shot in early December 2014 in Hahnville , Louisiana .
Filming ended on December 15 , 2014 .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Bear McCreary composed the music for the film .
The soundtrack was digitally released on March 11 , 2016 .
MARKETING Section::::Marketing .
The film 's title was revealed on January 15 , 2016 in a trailer attached to .
As with Cloverfield , a viral marketing campaign was used that included elements of an alternate reality game .
Bad Robot kick - started the campaign in early February 2016 by updating the Tagruato.jp website used for the original film .
The campaign revealed backstory information about the character Howard Stambler and his daughter .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film was released in select countries on March 10 , 2016 , in regular and IMAX theaters , before its official release in North America on March 11 , also in conventional and IMAX theaters .
Those who attended screenings of the film at AMC IMAX theaters were eligible to receive collectible movie posters , which illustrated the three main characters separately .
The film was rated PG-13 by the Motion Picture Association of America for " thematic material including frightening sequences of threat with some violence , and brief language " .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
10 Cloverfield Lane grossed $ 72.1 million in the United States and $ 38.1 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 110.2 million .
In the United States and Canada , the film made $ 1.8 million from its Thursday night previews at 2,500 theaters , and $ 8 million on its first day ( including Thursday previews ) .
In its opening weekend , it earned $ 24.7 million , finishing in second place at the box office behind Zootopia ( $ 51.3 million ) , which was in its second weekend .
Outside North America , 10 Cloverfield Lane received a staggered release , across 54 countries .
It earned $ 1.5 million in its opening weekend from six international markets with a bulk of it coming from Australia ( $ 1 million ) .
Overall , the top openings were in the United Kingdom and Ireland ( $ 2.2 million ) , South Korea ( $ 1.7 million ) , and France ( $ 1.4 million ) .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
10 Cloverfield Lane received positive reviews from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a rating of 90 % based on 288 reviews , with a weighted average score of 7.5/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Smart , solidly crafted , and palpably tense , 10 Cloverfield Lane makes the most of its confined setting and outstanding cast — and suggests a new frontier for franchise filmmaking .
"
Metacritic gives the film a score of 76 out of 100 , based on 43 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B – " on an A+ to F scale .
Bill Zwecker of the Chicago Sun - Times gave 10 Cloverfield Lane four stars out of four , commending the film as " continually gripping and extremely engrossing ...
[ Dan Trachtenberg ] helmed this film with artistry , imagination and skillful precision . "
Jeannette Catsoulis of the New York Times praised the cast 's performance and Jeff Cutter 's cinematography , while writing : " Sneakily tweaking our fears of terrorism , ' 10 Cloverfield Lane , ' though no more than a kissing cousin to its namesake , is smartly chilling and finally spectacular .
A sequel is virtually a given . "
Alan Scherstuhl of Village Voice also praised the acting and technical aspects , but wrote that the film " is less compelling in terms of character and meaning . "
In a mixed review for Slant , Chuck Bowen found a lack of character development between the three leads , and labeled the film 's ending as anticlimactic .
Bowen also writes : " The film hits its expositional narrative marks and nothing else ...
10 Cloverfield Lane will almost immediately evaporate from the mind , before J.J. Abrams commences in selling you the same thing all over again . "
Soren Andersen of the Seattle Times , who gave 10 Cloverfield Lane one and half stars out of four , similarly criticized the film 's ending , labeling it as " full - bore " and " Too little .
Too late .
"
James Verniere of the Boston Herald disapproved of the characters and pacing , and he ultimately described the film as " a crummy , low - rent , intellectually bereft thriller . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Association !
Category !
Nominee(s ) !
Result ! class="unsortable
" FUTURE Section::::Future .
Having originally planned the film as a direct sequel to Cloverfield , Abrams suggested that he has thought of something that if they are lucky enough to get it made " could be really cool that [ it ] connects some stories " in a third film , even teasing a larger Cloverfield universe .
Interviews with Trachtenberg and Winstead confirm that the movie is , and always was intended to be , an expansion of the first film , with Trachtenberg calling it the " Cloververse " .
Winstead has voiced her interest in returning for another installment .
In October 2016 , it was revealed that the Abrams - produced God Particle would be the third installment in the Cloverfield franchise .
After several postponements of the film 's release date , it was released as a Netflix Original on February 4 , 2018 , under the new title The Cloverfield Paradox .
In The Cloverfield Paradox , Donal Logue cameos as Mark Stambler , a conspiracy theorist discussing the " Cloverfield Paradox " ; reviewers observed that the character shares the same surname as Howard Stambler in 10 Cloverfield Lane .
Suzanne Cryer , who appeared as Leslie in 10 Cloverfield Lane , also appears in a brief cameo role as a newscaster who interviews Stambler .
SEE ALSO
* List of films featuring extraterrestrials REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS