MICROSOFT OFFICE 2016 Microsoft Office 2016 ( codenamed Office 16 ) is a version of the Microsoft Office productivity suite , succeeding both Office 2013 and Office for Mac 2011 , and preceding Office 2019 for both platforms .
It was released on macOS on July 9 , 2015 and on Microsoft Windows on September 22 , 2015 for Office 365 subscribers .
Mainstream support ends on October 13 , 2020 , and extended support ends on October 14 , 2025 .
The perpetually licensed version on macOS and Windows was released on September 22 , 2015 .
Since its successor Office 2019 only supports Windows 10 or Windows Server 2016 , this is the last version of Microsoft Office compatible with Windows 7 , Windows Server 2008 R2 , Windows 8 , Windows 8.1 , Windows Server 2012 , and Windows Server 2012 R2 .
NEW FEATURES
WINDOWS Section::::New features .
Section::::Windows .
New features in the Windows release include the ability to create , open , edit , and save files in the cloud straight from the desktop , a new search tool for commands available in Word , PowerPoint , Excel , Outlook and Access named " Tell Me " , more " Send As " options in Word and PowerPoint , and co - authoring in real time with users connected to Office Online .
Other smaller features include Insights , a feature powered by Bing to provide contextual information from the web , a Designer sidebar in PowerPoint to optimize the layout of slides , new chart types and templates in Excel ( such as treemap , sunburst chart ( also known as a ring chart ) , waterfall chart , box plot and histogram , and financial and calendar templates ) , new animations in PowerPoint ( such as the Morph transition ) , the ability to insert online video in OneNote , and a data loss prevention feature in Word , Excel , and PowerPoint .
Microsoft Office 2016 is the first in the series to support the vector graphic format SVG .
Microsoft Office 2016 can not coexist with Microsoft Office 2013 apps , but it can coexist with earlier versions of Microsoft Office , such as 2003 , 2007 , and 2010 .
Microsoft requires that any 2013 versions be uninstalled , which it will offer to do automatically , before the 2016 versions can be installed .
Despite not supporting Windows XP anymore , tooltips for various ribbon items ( e.g. Paragraph , Font , Footnotes or Page Setup ) still show screenshots of Office on Windows XP .
MAC Section::::Mac .
New features in the Mac release include an updated user interface that uses ribbons , full support for Retina Display , and new sharing features for Office documents .
In Word , there is a new Design tab , an Insights feature , which is powered by Bing , and real - time co - authoring .
In Excel , there is a Recommended Charts feature , and PivotTable Slicers .
In PowerPoint , there are theme variants , which provide different color schemes for a theme .
In Outlook , there is a Propose New Time feature , the ability to see calendars side by side , and a weather forecast in the calendar view .
Outlook 2016 for Mac has very limited support for synchronization of collaboration services outside basic email .
With version 15.25 , Office for Mac transitioned from 32-bit to 64-bit by default .
Users that require a 32-bit version for compatibility reasons will be able to download the 15.25 version as a manual , one - time update from the Microsoft Office website .
All versions following 15.25 will be 64-bit only .
Office for Mac received Touch Bar support in an update on February 16 , 2017 , following the launch of the 2016 MacBook Pro models .
EDITIONS TRADITIONAL EDITIONS Section::::Editions .
Section::::Traditional editions .
As with previous versions , Office 2016 is made available in several distinct editions aimed towards different markets .
All traditional editions of Microsoft Office 2016 contain Word , Excel , PowerPoint and OneNote and are licensed for use on one computer .
Five traditional editions of Office 2016 were released for Windows :
* Home & Student :
This retail suite includes the core applications only .
* Home & Business : This retail suite includes the core applications and Outlook .
* Standard : This suite , only available through volume licensing channels , includes the core applications , as well as Outlook and Publisher .
* Professional : This retail suite includes the core applications , as well as Outlook , Publisher and Access .
It uses the Windows Installer method for offline installation .
*
Professional Plus : This suite , only available through volume licensing channels , includes the core applications , as well as Outlook , Publisher , Access and Skype for Business .
It uses the Click - to - Run method for online installation .
Three traditional editions of Office 2016 were released for Mac :
* Home & Student :
This retail suite includes the core applications only .
* Home & Business : This retail suite includes the core applications and Outlook .
* Standard : This suite , only available through volume licensing channels , includes the core applications and Outlook .
OFFICE 365 Section::::Office 365 .
The Office 365 subscription services , which were previously aimed towards business and enterprise users , were expanded for Office 2016 to include new plans aimed at home use .
The subscriptions allow use of the Office 2016 applications by multiple users using a software as a service model .
Different plans are available for Office 365 , some of which also include value - added services , such as 1 TB of OneDrive storage and 60 Skype minutes per month on the Home Premium plan .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
The user interface design of Office 2016 for Windows is relatively unchanged from its predecessor , Microsoft Office 2013 .
It retains the flat design that was introduced along with the Metro design language , albeit with a few modifications to the layout , in order to conform with the design of Microsoft Office Mobile .
When Office 2016 was released , it came with three themes .
The default theme , known as " colorful " , features a solid color on the top band of the ribbon , corresponding to the color of the Office application being used , for example , a solid dark blue is featured prominently in Microsoft Word .
The theme had been described as useful in making the tab headings more distinct .
In addition , both the " white " and " dark grey " themes from Office 2013 are available as well , though no new backgrounds have been added , nor have any existing backgrounds been removed .
A fourth " black " theme was added as part of an update in January 2016 .
The update was not released to users of the traditional editions .
CRITICISM Section::::Criticism .
On the 13th of November 2018 a report initiated by the Government of the Netherlands showed that Microsoft Office 2016 and Office 365 do not comply with the GDPR , the European statute on privacy .
SEE ALSO
* List of office suites REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS