FOURFIVESECONDS
" FourFiveSeconds " is a song recorded by Bajan singer Rihanna , American musician Kanye West , and English musician and former Beatles member Paul McCartney .
It was written and produced by West , McCartney , Mike Dean , Dave Longstreth and Noah Goldstein with additional writing from Kirby Lauryen , Ty Dolla Sign , Dallas Austin , Elon Rutberg and Rihanna .
Previewed by West at the iHeartMedia Music Summit on January 21 , 2015 , it was posted on Rihanna 's official website on January 24 .
The same day the song was made available for digital download .
" FourFiveSeconds " is a folk - pop , pop , pop rock and soul pop song with an instrumentation consisting of an acoustic guitar , organ and bass guitar .
Vocals are mainly by Rihanna , with significant vocal portions of the song performed by West .
McCartney is featured on the track as a musician , but does not sing any lead vocal part .
Upon its release , it peaked at number four on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart .
In doing so it gave Rihanna her 26th top - ten song on the chart , while McCartney set a record by ending the longest break between top - ten singles on the chart .
The song also peaked at number one on the US Billboard Hot R&B / Hip - Hop Songs chart .
Internationally , " FourFiveSeconds " reached number one in Australia , Denmark , Ireland , Luxembourg , New Zealand and Sweden , as well as the top - three in Canada , France and the United Kingdom .
To promote the song , an accompanying black - and - white music video was directed by Dutch photographer duo Inez and Vinoodh in New York City .
Rihanna , McCartney and West performed " FourFiveSeconds " for the first time at the 57th Annual Grammy Awards on February 8 held at the Staples Center in Los Angeles ; the performance received highly positive reviews .
The single has been covered by various recording artists , including Canadian rapper Drake and British singer - songwriter James Bay .
BACKGROUND AND RELEASE Section::::Background and release .
On January 21 , 2015 , Kanye West made a surprise appearance at the iHeartMedia Music Summit , where he spoke about his career , played a few upcoming songs , and concluded with a collaboration with Rihanna that " featured acoustic guitar and a big , soaring chorus and melody with a massive hook .
He then slammed his laptop shut and walked offstage to a standing ovation . "
Earlier , on January 2 , recording artist and producer Ty Dolla Sign gave an interview to Billboard magazine where it revealed that he , West , Rihanna and Paul McCartney worked on a track together , which was yet to receive its final title .
On January 24 , Rihanna posted the song on her official website , Rihannanow.com .
The song titled " FourFiveSeconds " was released as single being made available for digital download on January 24 via the iTunes Store .
In the United Kingdom it was digitally released on January 26 via Amazon .
A CD single featuring " FourFiveSeconds " and its music video was released on February 27 in Germany .
" FourFiveSeconds " was written by West , McCartney , Kirby Lauryen , Mike Dean , Sign , Dave Longstreth , Dallas Austin , Elon Rutberg and Noah Goldstein .
It was produced by West and McCartney , co - produced by Dean , while additional production was provided by Longstreth and Goldstein .
The single was recorded at the Jungle City Studios in New York City , Windmark Recording in Santa Monica and No Name Studios in Mexico .
Marcos Tovar along with Goldstein and Dean had done the recording of the vocals , while Brendan Morawski , Zeke Mishanec , Jeremy " Head " Hartney , Brandon Wood and Jordan Heskett served as assistant recording engineers .
The vocal production of the song was done by Kuk Harrell and it was mixed by Manny Marroquin at the Larabee Studios in Los Angeles .
Assistant mixing was made by Chris Galland , Jeff Jackson and Ike Schultz .
McCartney played the acoustic guitar , Longstreth played the organ and Dean played the bass guitar .
On February 8 , during his Grammy Awards red carpet interview , West explained how the collaboration came to fruition : " I 'm executive producer of Rihanna 's album , and I said I 'd done a few songs with Paul McCartney and she could n't get past this record .
She had to have it on her album ...
So now we at the Grammys doing it " .
West further compared Rihanna 's vocals on the song to that of Scottish singer Annie Lennox :
" I feel like she has this type of energy in her vocals .
And she even brought it to another level of like soul and heart and artistry " .
In an interview with V magazine , Rihanna revealed , " The thing that made me fall in love with [ ' FourFiveSeconds ' ] is the juxtaposition of the music and the lyrics .
When you read the lyrics it 's a completely different song than what you are hearing .
The music is easygoing , but the lyrical content is very loud and in your face . "
Although it is a first collaboration by the trio , they have collaborated separately .
West and McCartney collaborated on the 2014 single " Only One " , a track dedicated to West 's daughter North .
Rihanna and West previously collaborated on Jay - Z 's 2009 single " Run This Town " — which became a commercial success and peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot 100 chart — and West 's 2011 single " All of the Lights " , a track featuring backup vocals by John Legend , Fergie , and Elton John among others .
COMPOSITION AND LYRICAL INTERPRETATION Section::::Composition and lyrical interpretation .
" FourFiveSeconds " is an acoustic folk - pop , pop , pop rock and soul pop song , with a length of three minutes and eight seconds .
Critics noted how the song has a stripped back feel to it , and that it incorporates elements of country and folk .
" FourFiveSeconds " makes use of a simple instrumentation , primarily consisting of an acoustic guitar and organ , as well as a bass guitar in the background .
It has been noted that West sings his lines in the song instead of rapping them , which prompted Jim Farber of the Daily News to write that he could have done with auto - tune to smooth out his " unsteady vocals . "
" FourFiveSeconds " is written in the key of D major , in common time , with a tempo of 103 beats per minute .
Rihanna and West 's vocals span two octaves from the low note of D to the high note of D. Billboard 's Jocelyn Vena stated that the musical direction of the song represents a departure from the material present on Rihanna 's most recent studio album , Unapologetic ( 2012 ) , which incorporated EDM and dubstep .
Hugh Mclntyre of Forbes also wrote that the song represents a change in musical direction for Rihanna and West , while noting that it is consistent with McCartney 's style of music .
Lanre Bakare of The Guardian described " FourFiveSeconds " as an " acoustic ballad " and the antithesis of what Rihanna and West 's previous collaborations have sounded like .
Writing for Vogue magazine , Alex Frank described the song as an " unplugged version " of Rihanna 's 2011 single
" We Found Love " , and without the dance beats present on her previous singles .
The New York Post wrote that the lyrics " express emotions ranging from the flip to the resigned " .
Sharan Shetty of Slate stated that the song is about " heartbreak and redemption " , while a Yahoo !
News reviewer noted that it is about " personal travails and confusion " .
Nora Crotty of Elle magazine described the single as an " ode to repenting in the morning for the foolish mistakes you made the night before " .
Billboard 's Vena stated that a " plucky acoustic guitar " accompanies Rihanna 's vocals while she sings the lines , " I think I 've had enough/ Might get a little drunk/
I say what 's on my mind/
I might do a little time .
Cause all of my kindness/ Is taken for weakness . "
After the first chorus West sings , " Woke up an optimist/
Sun was shining , I 'm positive/
Then I heard you was talking trash/
Hold me
back/
I 'm about to spazz .
" On the second chorus , he and Rihanna harmonize as they sing , " Now I 'm four , five seconds from wylin'/
And we got three more days ' till Friday/ I 'm just trying to make it back home by Monday morning .
" McCartney 's voice can be heard sped up underneath West 's opening vocals .
McCartney originally played his guitar part slower and in a lower key , which West later sped up for the finished release , thus causing McCartney 's voice to sound much higher than its normal tone .
McCartney 's lyrics were improvised mid - performance and are for the most part drowned out by West 's vocals except for the lines
" We can run around " and " How 'bout a mystery " CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Peter Kandunias of Gigwise praised Rihanna 's and West 's vocals as well as McCartney 's instrumentation .
Mclntyre of Forbes noted : " The song puts the spotlight on Rihanna 's vocals , highlighting them in a way that her club - ready , bombastic tunes do n't usually . "
Jim Farber of New York Daily News stated that this collaboration is better than the previous West - McCartney collaboration .
Additionally , he praised Rihanna 's vocals and stated that they are a lot better than West 's , " who could have used more auto - tune to firm his unsteady vocals " .
Farber further noted : " It 's refreshing to hear Rihanna sing with so little affect , in a setting that 's much less processed than most of her recordings " .
Voxs Kelsey McKinney noted that " Rihanna 's voice shows significant growth in range and tone since her last album " .
She adds that Rihanna 's performance in the opening of the song is " more vulnerable than we 've heard Rihanna since 2012 's ' Stay ' , and hints that her new album may contain more confessional slow jams like this one " .
Spencer Kornhaber of The Atlantic wrote of Rihanna 's vocals : " Listen to the ragged squeak in her voice in the first verse , and how she maintains control as she alternates between contemplative trills and gospel shouts during the bridge " .
According to Kornhaber , the song showcases " how distinctive her timbre and phrasing is " , something that was n't heard on her previous songs like the 2010 single " Only Girl ( In the World ) " .
Travis Grier of Def Pen Radio thought that the song is a good choice for Rihanna to achieve legendary status , as , " she 's tackled pretty much every genre under the sun and ' FourFiveSeconds ' just expands her versatility even more " .
Crotty of Elle wrote that the song is " awesome " and " sweet " .
In June 2015 , Jason Lipshutz of Billboard named " FourFiveSeconds " one of the " 10 Best Songs of 2015 ( So Far )
" stating "
It 's the end of June , and we 're still waiting for the new Rihanna and Kanye West albums … as well as some indication that either will be coming soon .
To tide us over , however , the pair of music superstars linked up with a legend and recorded a durable , folked - up soul sing - along .
Ye and Rih always zag when we expect them to zig , and we 're forever grateful for it . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
The song received a nomination for Collaboration of the Year at the American Music Awards of 2015 .
Although " FourFiveSeconds " was described by a writer of LA Times as " tailor - made for multiple Grammy nominations " the song failed to receive a nomination in any category for the 2016 Grammy Awards . !
Publication !
Rank !
List
CHART PERFORMANCE NORTH AMERICA
Section::::Chart performance .
Section::::North America .
" FourFiveSeconds " debuted at number 37 on the US Mainstream Top 40 chart before the end of two days of airplay .
Nielsen Music attributed the quick debut to hourly plays on radio stations owned by iHeartMedia .
The song garnered 1,000 plays on 100 reports , with an audience reach of 7.4 million .
" FourFiveSeconds " is Rihanna 's 40th entry on the chart , while it is McCartney 's first since the chart 's launch in 1992 .
For the week dated January 31 , 2015 , the song debuted at number 54 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart .
with sales of 53,000 copies and became the chart 's top new entry .
Subsequently , it debuted at number 12 on the US Hot R&B / Hip - Hop Songs chart .
The next week , it moved to number 25 on the Pop Songs chart , becoming its greatest gainer .
Additionally , it debuted at number 34 on the US Adult Pop Songs chart and number 25 on the US Rhythmic Chart .
On the Billboard Hot 100 , it moved to number 15 with sales of over 138,000 digital downloads in its second week .
It became McCartney 's highest charting single since 1986 , when his single " Spies Like Us " reached number seven on the chart .
The same week , it moved ten places from number 12 to number two on the Hot R&B /
Hip Hop Songs chart .
In its third week , the song jumped to number six on the Billboard Hot 100 as a result of the digital downloads ; it sold 181,000 copies for the week and peaked at number three on the Digital Songs chart .
It marked McCartney 's first top - ten on the Hot 100 chart after 29 years .
He surpassed Santana , who recorded a span of 28 years between his top - tens from 1971 to 1999 , thus ending the longest break between top - ten songs in the 56-year history of the chart .
" FourFiveSeconds " became Rihanna 's 26th top - ten single on the chart and West 's 15th .
The same week , it topped the US Hot R&B / Hip - Hop Songs chart and became Rihanna 's fourth number one , while West 's seventh .
It was McCartney 's second number - one song on the chart following his 1983 duet with Michael Jackson , " The Girl Is Mine " .
In the song 's fourth week on the Billboard Hot 100 chart , the song moved two places and peaked at number four .
It became McCartney 's first top - five hit in 31 years , one month , and one week ; his last top - five hit was his 1983 collaboration with Jackson , " Say Say Say " , which became his ninth solo number - one single .
For the issue dated March 7 , " FourFiveSeconds " moved to number 10 on the Pop Songs chart with an audience impression of over 70 million .
With the achievement , Rihanna tied Mariah Carey for most top 10 songs on the chart ; each of them has 23 top 10 singles .
Although it did n't chart on the US Hot Country Songs chart , it has received airplay on a number of country stations in major metropolitan areas .
As of July 2015 , " FourFiveSeconds " has sold 1,868,000 copies in the United States .
In Canada , " FourFiveSeconds " debuted at number 65 on the Canadian Hot 100 for the week dated February 7 .
The next week it jumped 56 places to number nine with biggest gain in digital sales and radio airplay for that issue .
In its third week it peaked at number four on the chart .
" FourFiveSeconds " reached its peak of number three on the chart in its sixth week , for the issue date March 14 .
As of July 2015 , " FourFiveSeconds " has sold 289,000 copies in Canada .
OCEANIA AND EUROPE Section::::Oceania and Europe .
In Australia , " FourFiveSeconds " debuted at number 13 on the singles chart for the week dated February 8 , 2015 .
The next week it jumped to number three and became Rihanna 's 28th top - ten song on the chart .
For the week dated February 16 , the song topped the chart and became Rihanna 's ninth song to reach number one .
It also became West 's second chart - topper and McCartney 's third ( post Beatles ) .
With the feat , McCartney became the oldest artist at age 72 to reach number one on the chart , a record which was previously held by American singer Cher ; she was 52 when her single " Believe " topped the chart .
Furthermore , " FourFiveSeconds " also peaked at number one on the Australian Urban Singles Chart .
The single was certified triple platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting sales of over 210,000 digital copies .
In New Zealand , it debuted at number nine and peaked at number one for the week dated March 9 .
It became Rihanna 's 31st top - ten single and sixth number - one on the chart .
" FourFiveSeconds " topped the charts for five consecutive weeks and was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for selling over 30,000 copies in the country .
In the United Kingdom , " FourFiveSeconds " debuted at number five on the UK Singles Chart for the week ending date February 7 , 2015 .
The next week it reached a peak of number four and sold 41,535 digital downloads .
On March 8 , 2015 , the track reached a new peak of three on the chart .
and has sold over 452,000 copies in the country , as of April 2015 .
In Ireland , the song debuted at number fourteen on the Irish Singles Chart for the week dated January 29 .
On March 19 , in its eight - week on the chart , it reached number one .
" FourFiveSeconds " attained commercial success in continental Europe too and reached the top - five on over 18 national charts .
It debuted at number one on the Swedish Singles Chart on March 6 and stayed on the position for two consecutive weeks .
It became fourth Swedish number - one song for Rihanna , second for McCartney and first for West .
It was certified double platinum by the Swedish Recording Industry Association ( GLF ) and sold over 80,000 digital copies in the country alone .
" FourFiveSeconds " debuted at number 10 on the Danish Singles Chart on March 6 .
The next week topped the chart and became Rihanna 's sixth and McCartney and West 's first number one single on the chart .
It stayed on the top of it for four consecutive weeks and was certified gold by IFPI Denmark for shipping over 30,000 copies of the song in the country .
The single debuted at number 39 in the sixth week of the Norwegian Singles Chart and
the next week it fell off it .
In its tenth week , the song re - entered at number 11 .
In the twelfth week of the chart , " FourFiveSeconds " topped the chart and became Rihanna 's eight , McCartney 's third and West 's first chart - topper in the country .
The single reached number four in both Italy and Spain .
In the former it was certified gold by the Federation of the Italian music industry ( FIMI ) denoting sales / streams of 25,000 copies .
On the Swiss Singles Chart , the song peaked at number three and stayed on the position for seven consecutive weeks .
It was certified gold by the IFPI Switzerland for selling over 15,000 copies in the country alone .
" FourFiveSeconds " was also successful in France , where it peaked at number two on the singles chart after previously debuting at number 18 .
MUSIC VIDEO
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Music video .
Section::::Development .
The accompanying music video for " FourFiveSeconds " was directed by Dutch photographer duo , Inez and Vinoodh and shot in late December in New York City .
Stephanie Bargas , Jeff Lepine and Jon Barlow served as the visual 's producers , while theCollectiveShift executively produced it .
Jodokus Driessen was the director of photography , with Otto Arsenault serving both as editor and cinematographer .
On January 30 , via her official YouTube channel , Rihanna posted a behind the scenes video from the making of the clip .
The video features Rihanna , West , and McCartney performing against a white background .
She explained the fashion that they used for the video , " Kanye came up with the idea of doing just some real street , denim , all - American - type look .
Denim never goes out of style ; it 's classic , it 's iconic , just like the Beatles . "
On February 2 , Rihanna posted a snippet of the clip on her official Instagram account .
It shows the singer in silhouette as she sings the lyrics ; she is wearing a Sean John throwback denim jacket .
The video premiered on February 3 on Rihanna 's official Vevo channel on YouTube .
The same day , it was digitally released on the iTunes Store .
ANALYSIS AND RECEPTION Section::::Analysis and reception .
According to Kreps of Rolling Stone , " The Herb Ritts - esque black - and - white clip finds Rihanna and West just singing their collaborative track while McCartney strums the riff on an acoustic guitar , with the real highlight coming when the three musical titans share the same frame . "
Steven Gottlieb of VideoStatic described it as , " vertically constrained to just the center third of the screen , the focus of this silvery black - and - white clip is Rihanna 's emotional performance " , while McCartney and West supported her role .
According to Erin Strecker of Billboard the video allows " each of the three superstars their moment in the spotlight .
The camera mostly switches between tight individual shots of each denim - clad , passionate performer , although there are also a few scenes of all three together " .
Jessica Goodman of The Huffington Post described the video as " simple and clean , much like the song " .
Similarly , Nolan Feeney of Time called the video simple , but also " surprisingly intimate " like the single .
He also described Rihanna 's eye - roll in the video as " epic " .
Additionally , Feeney noted that the video is shot in a and compared it to the works of French - Canadian filmmaker Xavier Dolan .
A reviewer of MTV UK noted that the video is set in a square frame and resembles the single 's artwork .
Sophie Schillaci of Entertainment Tonight called the square " Instagram friendly " .
Gregory E. Miller of The New York Post noted that the video , shot on a minimalist set , is a departure from Rihanna 's previous high - production videos .
VH1 's Alexa Tietjen called the visual " stunning " and further praised Rihanna 's looks , West 's attitude , and McCartney 's " social media skills " .
Dee Locket of Slate called the visual a " performance video " in which Rihanna and West " appear to be on the verge of losing it " .
Billy Johnson Jr. of Yahoo !
Music stated that if the visual wanted to depict Rihanna " as a fragile woman on the verge of snapping " , it succeeded : " Stylistically , the black and white video finds a happy medium between the look and feel of Abercrombie & Fitch and Gap ad campaigns with Rihanna [ baring ] just enough cleavage to make censors nervous . "
Rachel Maresca of Daily News noted that West vents his aggression by kicking the camera .
LIVE PERFORMANCES AND COVERS Section::::Live performances and covers .
Rihanna , McCartney and West performed " FourFiveSeconds " at the 57th Annual Grammy Awards held on February 8 , 2015 , at the Staples Center in Los Angeles .
Chris Payne of Billboard named the performance as one of the best moments of the ceremony and praised Rihanna 's vocals , " Let 's face it – seeing this improbable collaboration in person is the main reason many tuned in .
There are so many ways three huge personas can get in the way , but Rihanna , ' Ye , and Sir Paul knew how to bring this one to life " .
Joe Lynch of the same publication listed the performance at fourth out of the total of 23 performances that night , writing , " ' FourFiveSeconds ' ironically takes time to grow on you , but the presence of three disparate pop stars on stage with each other was one of the most deliriously awesome Grammy highlights " .
Isabella Biedenharn of Entertainment Weekly graded the performance an " A " and praised Rihanna and West 's vocals and the trio 's wardrobe .
According to TiVo , the performance was the fifth most - viewed segment of the night .
On April 4 , Rihanna performed at the Final Four of the March Madness 2015 which was held in Indianapolis , Indiana .
During the performance , she sang a solo version of " FourFiveSeconds " , as well as , her new songs "
Bitch
Better Have My Money " and " American Oxygen " among others .
Canadian rapper Drake covered the song during his performance at the Sprite NBA All - Star Weekend concert held at the Irving Plaza in New York City on February 14 .
Welsh band Punk Rock Factory recorded a cover of the song , transforming it into " a punk rock anthem " .
English singer - songwriter James Bay covered " FourFiveSeconds " during the BBC Radio 1 Lounge on March 3 .
Australian pop singer Cody Simpson performed an acoustic version of the single during his visit on SiriusXM radio .
Christina Garibaldi of MTV News , regarding the performance , wrote , " The ' New Problems ' singer effortlessly covers Rihanna and Kanye 's verses while giving off some serious John Mayer vibes .
" Rihanna also performed the song on the South American dates in late September , 2015 .
One of the shows was one of the nights of the Rock in Rio festival , held in Rio de Janeiro , Brazil .
One Direction covered the song during the BBC Radio One Live Lounge on 13 November .
The song was also performed on the Anti World Tour .
TRACK LISTING CREDITS AND PERSONNEL Section::::Credits and personnel .
Credits adapted from the liner notes of the CD single of " FourFiveSeconds " .
and ASCAP Locations * Recorded at Jungle City Studios , New York City , New York ; Windmark Recording , Santa Monica , California ; No Name Studios , Mexico
* Mixed at Larabee Studios , Los Angeles , California Personnel * Production –
Kanye West , Paul McCartney * Co - production , fuzz bass –
Mike Dean * Additional production – Dave Longstreth , Noah Goldstein
* Vocal production –
Kuk Harrell * Recording – Marcos Tovar , Noah Goldstein ,
Mike Dean
* Assistant recording engineer – Brendan Morawski , Zeke Mishanec ,
Jeremy " Head " Hartney , Brandon Wood , Jordan Heskett
*
Mixing –
Manny Marroquin
* Assistant mixing – Chris Galland , Jeff Jackson , Ike Schultz
* Acoustic guitar –
Paul McCartney *
Organ –
Dave Longstreth
CHARTS
WEEKLY CHARTS
Section::::Charts .
Section::::Weekly charts . !
Chart ( 2015 ) !
Peakposition !
scope="row
" Australia Urban ( ARIA ) ! scope="row " Dominican Republic ( Monitor Latino ) ! scope="row " Lebanon ( Lebanese Top 20Billboard ) ! scope="row " Slovenia ( SloTop50 ) YEAR - END CHARTS Section::::Year - end charts . !
scope="col"Chart ( 2015 ) !
scope="col"Position !
scope="row " Australia ( ARIA ) ! scope="row " Australia Urban ( ARIA )
align="center"3 !
scope="row"Austria
( Ö3 Austria Top 40 ) !
scope="row"Belgium (
Ultratop 50 Flanders ) !
scope="row"Belgium
Urban ( Ultratop Flanders ) !
scope="row"Belgium
( Ultratop 50 Wallonia ) !
scope="row"Canadian Hot 100
( Billboard ) !
scope="row " Germany ( Official German Charts ) !
scope="row"Ireland
( IRMA ) !
scope="row " Israel ( Media Forest ) ! scope="row " Italy ( FIMI ) !
scope="row"Netherlands ( Dutch Top 40 ) !
scope="row"Netherlands ( Single Top 100 ) !
scope="row"New Zealand ( Recorded Music NZ ) ! scope="row " Poland ( ZPAV ) !
scope="row"Slovenia ( SloTop50 ) !
scope="row"Switzerland
( Schweizer Hitparade ) ! scope="row"UK
Singles ( Official Charts Company ) ! scope="row"US
Billboard Hot 100 ! scope="row"US
Hot R&B /
Hip - Hop Songs ( Billboard ) ! scope="row"US
Radio Songs ( Billboard ) ! scope="row"US
Pop Songs ( Billboard ) ! scope="row"US
R&B Songs ( Billboard ) ! scope="row"US
Rhythmic Songs
( Billboard )
CERTIFICATIONS
RELEASE HISTORY Section::::Release history .
!
scope="col " Country ! scope="col " Date ! scope="col " Format ! scope="col " Label ! scope="col " ! scope="row " Canada ! scope="row " United States !
scope="row
" Australia ! scope="row
" Austria ! scope="row " Denmark ! scope="row
" France ! scope="row " Germany !
scope="row " Italy ! scope="row " New Zealand !
scope="row
" Spain ! scope="row
" Turkey ! scope="row " United Kingdom ! scope="row " Italy January 30 , 2015 Mainstream radio Universal ! scope="row " Germany SEE ALSO * List of number - one singles of 2015 ( Australia ) * List of number - one R&B / hip - hop songs of 2015 ( U.S. )
* List of UK top 10 singles in 2015 * List of number - one singles from the 2010s ( New Zealand )
* List of number - one singles and albums in Sweden
* List of number - one hits of 2015
( Denmark ) * List of number - one songs in Norway
* List of number - one singles of 2015 ( Ireland ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS