A WEDDING ( GLEE ) " A Wedding " is the eighth episode of the sixth season of the American musical television series Glee , and the 116th overall .
The episode was written by Ross Maxwell , directed by executive producer Bradley Buecker , and first aired on February 20 , 2015 on Fox in the United States .
The episode features the planning for and wedding day of Brittany Pierce and Santana Lopez , which unexpectedly turns into a double wedding , with Blaine Anderson and Kurt Hummel also marrying each other in a joint ceremony with Brittany and Santana .
The episode features special guest stars Gloria Estefan as Santana 's mother Maribel Lopez , Ken Jeong and Jennifer Coolidge as Brittany 's parents Pierce and Whitney Pierce , and Gina Gershon as Blaine 's mother Pam Anderson .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Whitney Pierce ( Jennifer Coolidge ) brings Artie Abrams ( Kevin McHale ) , Brittany Pierce ( Heather Morris ) , Santana Lopez ( Naya Rivera ) , and Santana 's mother Maribel Lopez ( Gloria Estefan ) to a barn in Indiana where she wants Brittany and Santana to be married in , as it was the birthplace of Brittany and because gay marriage is legal in Indiana but not in Ohio .
Decorations begin with the help of Kurt Hummel ( Chris Colfer ) and Tina Cohen - Chang ( Jenna Ushkowitz ) but Brittany has wedding jitters as their officiant has cancelled , so Kurt realizes that his father , Burt Hummel ( Mike O'Malley ) can officiate .
Santana asks Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) , Mercedes Jones ( Amber Riley ) , and Tina to help pick dresses for herself and Brittany , but Santana breaks tradition by seeing Brittany in her wedding dress which sends Brittany into a superstitious frenzy .
While planning a seating chart , Rachel is hesitant about being with Sam Evans ( Chord Overstreet ) as she is unsure if Burt and his wife Carole Hudson ( Romy Rosemont ) will object , but Mercedes assures her that it will be accepted .
Santana flatly refuses to allow Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) to be at the wedding .
Kurt tells his friend Walter ( Harry Hamlin ) that he is going to the wedding with Blaine Anderson ( Darren Criss ) , and Walter gently breaks off their relationship while encouraging Kurt to pursue his true love .
Kurt runs to Blaine 's home where they confess their mutual love for one another and kiss .
Tina tells Artie , Blaine , and Noah " Puck " Puckerman ( Mark Salling )
her intentions to propose to Mike Chang ( Harry Shum , Jr. ) even though they have just reunited as friends and are mostly communicating via text messages .
She asks for their blessing , which they do , though Artie initially hesitates .
Sue tells Santana that she really wants to attend her wedding
but Santana again curtly rejects her .
At the wedding venue , Burt tells Kurt and Blaine that he had no regrets about going into a second marriage with Carole , and she tells them to seize every moment .
Brittany is still in a superstitious frenzy which is only increased when Santana comes in with Brittany in her wedding dress , but Santana calms her down .
Sue arrives , having brought Santana 's grandmother , Alma Lopez ( Ivonne Coll ) , who she has helped to realize that although Alma may not believe females should marry each other , family is the most important thing , and she asks to attend the wedding .
Santana then forgives Sue and allows her to stay .
Sue then pulls Blaine and Kurt to a room where there are two wedding tuxedos waiting for them .
Brittany explains that Blaine and Kurt 's relationship inspired her , and that she would like for them to be married alongside her and Santana , who also supports the idea .
After some debate and hesitation , Blaine and Kurt agree to get married in a joint ceremony .
Brittany , Santana , Kurt and Blaine have a shared exchange of vows , and both couples are married .
After some dancing , Tina privately asks Mike to marry her , but Mike gently turns her down , as he does love her but not in that way .
Back at McKinley High , Tina and Artie have lunch together and agree to marry each other if neither one is married by age 30 .
Sue gives a honeymoon vacation to each of the newlywed couples .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Returning recurring characters that appear in the episode include Heather Morris as Brittany Pierce , Naya Rivera as Santana Lopez , Mark Salling as Noah " Puck " Puckerman , Harry Shum , Jr. as Mike Chang , Becca Tobin as Kitty Wilde , Jenna Ushkowitz as Tina Cohen - Chang , Mike O'Malley as Burt Hummel , Romy Rosemont as Carole Hudson , Vanessa Lengies as Sugar Motta , Samantha Marie Ware as Jane Hayward , Noah Guthrie as Roderick , Marshall Williams as Spencer Porter , Billy Lewis Jr. as Mason McCarthy , and Laura Dreyfuss as Madison McCarthy .
Guest appearances are made by Gloria Estefan as Maribel Lopez , Ken Jeong as Pierce Pierce , Jennifer Coolidge as Whitney Pierce , Gina Gershon as Pam Anderson ( Blaine 's mother ) , and Harry Hamlin as Walter .
The episode features four musical cover versions and one featured song .
" It 's Beautiful " by SOFIA was featured as background music during a scene where Brittany and Santana try on wedding dresses .
"
At Last " by Etta James was sung by Riley and McHale . "
Hey Ya ! "
by OutKast is sung by McHale with Ware , Dreyfuss , and multiple wedding guests .
" I 'm So Excited " by The Pointer Sisters is sung by Estefan , Coolidge , Rosemont , and Gershon with Lengies , Riley , Rivera , and Morris .
" Our Day Will Come " by Ruby & the Romantics is sung by Rivera , Morris , Criss , and Colfer .
Accompanying the music from this episode , the EP Glee :
The Music , A Wedding was released on February 20 , 2015 .
RECEPTION RATINGS Section::::Reception .
Section::::Ratings .
The episode was watched by 1.86 million viewers and received a 0.6 rating/2 share in the adult 18 - 49 demographic .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Lauren Hoffman from Vulture thought the episode was " overly sentimental , unrealistic , and a tiny bit too preoccupied with fan service .
It was also really , really lovely . "
Christopher Rogers from Hollywood Life loved that the episode " was more like a series reunion , as familiar faces returned for what turned out to be a surprise double wedding ! "
The A.V. Club 's Brandon Nowalk stated the plot " is a bunch of inevitabilities ; play along with your checklist until we get to something new .
The script is a bunch of very bad attempts at breeze . "
Miranda Wicker from TV Fanatic stated in her review that the episode would be known as " the best episode of the series ' final season . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS