BORDERLANDS :
THE HANDSOME COLLECTION Borderlands : The Handsome Collection is a compilation of first - person shooter video games developed by Gearbox Software and published by 2 K Games .
The collection consists of both Borderlands 2 and for PlayStation 4 and Xbox One , along with all of their accompanying downloadable content , enhanced local multiplayer , and the ability to transfer save data from their respective PlayStation 3 / Vita and Xbox 360 versions .
Borderlands 2 was ported by Iron Galaxy Studios and Borderlands : The Pre - Sequel by Armature Studio .
DEVELOPMENT AND RELEASE Section::::Development and release .
To maintain consistency with the previous installments in the franchise , — a follow up set between the first two games in Gearbox Software 's Borderlands franchise developed by 2 K Australia , was only released on PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 consoles .
In July 2014 , prior to the game 's release , 2 K Australia 's head Tony Lawrence reiterated that there was a possibility that The Pre - Sequel could be ported to PlayStation 4 and Xbox One — gauged by fan demand and sales .
In December 2014 , it was reported that a game titled Borderlands Remastered Edition , which was presumed to be a Borderlands port to PlayStation 4 and Xbox One , had received a rating from the Australian Classification Board .
No other details had been announced at that point .
The discovery drew comparisons to other " remastered " ports of recent previous generation games to the consoles , including Tomb Raider , The Last of Us , fellow Take - Two Interactive title Grand Theft Auto V , and .
The compilation was announced on January 20 , 2015 , as The Handsome Collection , for a release in North America on March 24 , 2015 , and elsewhere on March 27 , 2015 .
A limited " Claptrap - in - a - Box " edition was also announced ; this US$ 399 bundle includes lithographs of the playable characters from both games , a Steelbook case for the game , and a remote - controlled version of the robot character Claptrap ; it can be controlled from an Android or iOS device using the " ClaptrApp " , features a single wheel and gyroscopic stabilization , can play Claptrap 's in - game quotes , and has a camera in its eye that can be viewed from within the app .
Only 5,000 copies of this edition were produced .
The compilation does not include the first Borderlands : speaking at PAX South , Gearbox CEO Randy Pitchford stated that they may consider creating a port of the original game if The Handsome Collection is " wildly successful " .
On March 18 , 2015 , Gearbox Software and 2 K Games confirmed that the game had been declared gold , indicating it was being prepared for duplication and release .
CHANGES
Section::::Changes .
Both games in The Handsome Collection feature remastered graphics , and are capable of running at 1080p resolution at 60 frames per second when playing with one or two local players .
The games are also capable of local split - screen multiplayer with up to four players , rather than the two - player limit of the previous - generation versions ; four - player mode will reduce the frame rate to 30 frames per second .
Save data from the previous - generation versions of 2 or The Pre - Sequel ( including characters and Badass Rank ) can be migrated to The Handsome Collection from the PlayStation 3 and Vita versions to PlayStation 4 , and the Xbox 360 version to Xbox One .
Both games include all of their respective downloadable content — such as campaigns and additional playable characters .
Claptastic Voyage — a campaign for The Pre - Sequel that was released on the same day as The Handsome Collection , is not included on - disc , but is a free download .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Borderlands : The Handsome Collection received positive reviews from critics .
Aggregating review websites Metacritic gave the PlayStation 4 version 82/100 based on 49 reviews .
IGN gave the compilation an 8.4 out of 10 , praising the performance of its Borderlands 2 port for being " rock solid " .
Some issues were noted , including that the inventory menu in four - player mode was not scaled to fit the smaller amount of screen space , The Pre - Sequel had inconsistent frame rates , and users are unable to switch between the two games without rebooting it entirely , concluding that " Minor quibbles aside , The Handsome Collection is a great package for any console - bound Borderlands fan .
"
GamesRadar was also positive , praising the extent of content available , but criticized minor framerate issues and that no significant new features were added .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS