LAWS REGARDING INCEST IN THE UNITED STATES Laws regarding incest in the United States vary widely between jurisdictions regarding both the definition of the offense and penalties for its commission .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
In all but two states , incest is criminalized between consenting adults .
In New Jersey and Rhode Island , incest between consenting adults ( 16 or over for Rhode Island , 18 or over for New Jersey ) is not a criminal offense , though marriage is not allowed in either state .
New Jersey also increases the severity of underage sex offenses by a degree if they 're also incestuous , and criminalizes incest with 16 - 17 year olds ( the normal age of consent in New Jersey is 16 ) .
TABLE Section::::Table .
The table below summarizes these laws for individual U.S. States and the District of Columbia .
+
Laws regarding incest in the United States : States : : : !
Jurisdiction !
Prohibited relationships !
Prohibited acts !
Penalties
Alabama ( a ) A person commits incest if he marries or engages in sexual intercourse with a person he knows to be , either legitimately or illegitimately : ( 1 ) His ancestor or descendant by blood or adoption ; or ( 2 )
His brother or sister of the whole or half - blood or by adoption ; or ( 3 )
His stepchild or stepparent , while the marriage creating the relationship exists ; or ( 4 )
His aunt , uncle , nephew or niece of the whole or half - blood .
( b )
A person shall not be convicted of incest or of an attempt to commit incest upon the uncorroborated testimony of the person with whom the offense is alleged to have been committed .
( c ) Incest is a Class C felony .
A person he knows to be ( 1 ) his ancestor or descendant by blood or adoption ; ( 2 ) his stepchild or stepparent , while the marriage creating that relationship exists and while the stepchild is 18 years of age or less ; ( 3 ) his brother or sister of the whole or half - blood ; or ( 4 ) his uncle , aunt , nephew , or niece of the whole blood .
" a person is guilty of sexual assault in the third degree when such person engages in sexual intercourse with another person whom the actor knows to be related to him or her within any of the degrees of kindred specified in the statute that specifies which relatives are prohibited from marrying one another . "
Underage sexual offences are increased in severity by a degree if also incestuous .
Consensual incest between people 18 years old or more is not a criminal offense .
A person who is related either legitimately or illegitimately , as ( 1 ) an ancestor or descendant of the whole or half blood ; ( 2 ) a brother or sister of the whole or half blood ; or ( 3 ) an uncle , aunt , nephew , or niece by blood 2 ) Collateral by consanguinity up to the third degree .
including double - tie relationships as well as single ties , and includes the relationship of parent and child by adoption or brother and sister by adoption .
Consensual incest between people 16 years old or more is not a criminal offense .
No information
No information
No information
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Hughes , Graham .
" The Crime of Incest . "
Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology , Fall 1964 .
Volume 55 , Issue 3 ( September ) , Article 2 , p. 322 - 331 .
* " State Criminal Incest Statutes , 2010 .
American Prosecutors Research Institute , at the National District Attorneys Association .