DARK PLACES ( 2015 FILM )
Dark Places is a 2015 mystery thriller film directed by Gilles Paquet - Brenner .
The screenplay , by Paquet - Brenner , is based on Gillian Flynn 's 2009 novel of the same name .
It stars Charlize Theron , Christina Hendricks , Nicholas Hoult , and Chloë Grace Moretz .
The film was released in France on April 8 , 2015 , and in the United States on August 7 , 2015 , by A24 .
It is the second film on which Theron and Hoult have collaborated , the first being .
SUMMARY Section::::Summary .
The film opens in 1985 in Kinnakee , Kansas , where Libby Day is the sole survivor of the massacre of her mother and two sisters .
Responding to the police 's leading questions , she tells them that her brother Ben ( Sheridan ) committed the crime .
In the present day , Libby ( Theron ) has made a living from donations sent by strangers to the little girl they saw on the news .
With donations drying up , she is hard up for cash when she is approached by Lyle Wirth ( Hoult ) to make a personal appearance at his " True Crime " club .
She agrees to go and answer questions about her past for $ 700 .
Back in 1985 , Ben comes to the breakfast table with his hair dyed black .
He has a tense relationship with his mother Patty ( Hendricks ) and his eldest sister Michelle , who taunts Ben about being a loner and rumors about him at school .
Ben hangs out with a Satanist bookie named Trey Teepano .
Meanwhile , their mother Patty is told that her farm is being foreclosed on , despite her best efforts to stay afloat .
At Wirth 's club , Libby learns that most of the members believe her brother Ben is innocent .
His conviction was based on Libby 's testimony .
Still believing that Ben is guilty , Libby nevertheless agrees to work with the club in return for much needed money .
Urged by Wirth to visit Ben in prison , Libby 's curiosity about what motivated him to kill their family prods her to keep researching the case .
Prior to the murders , Ben was planning to run away with his pregnant girlfriend Diondra ( Moretz ) .
Meanwhile , several young girls have accused Ben of molesting them .
When Patty is informed of the charges , she visits the home of the chief accuser Krissi Cates , whose father is irate and looking to harm Ben .
Patty is distraught by the accusations and feels that she has failed her kids .
Back home , their father Runner ( Bridgers ) is waiting for Patty .
He needs money to skip town because he owes Trey more than he can repay .
He is violent and abusive towards Patty .
He attempts to rip her heirloom ruby necklace off her neck but , unable to do so , he abuses her and steals money from her wallet .
In the present , Libby tracks down Runner to an abandoned factory where he lives with other homeless addicts .
He tells her about Diondra 's pregnancy .
Libby also locates Krissi Cates ( Matteo ) , who eventually confesses that she made up the molestation accusations against Ben .
Meanwhile in 1985 , Patty is informed by a friend with the Farmers Home Administration that he might have a solution to her problems .
She meets with a stranger in the middle of the night who says that he can help her .
It later turns out that he is Calvin Diehl , a serial killer known as the Angel of Debt , who murders people so that they can collect on their life insurance policies .
Patty goes home and hides some money for Diehl .
At the same time , Diondra finds out about the accusations against Ben and convinces him to flee with her immediately .
They go to Ben 's house to steal some money .
Michelle overhears them talking and threatens to tell on them .
Diondra viciously attacks Michelle and starts to choke her .
Diehl has also entered the house .
In the hallway , he stabs Patty .
When her middle daughter rushes out of the bedroom to get help for Michelle , Diehl grabs the family shotgun and kills the young girl .
The shot distracts Ben from his effort to protect Michelle .
While he goes to see what has happened , Diondra kills Michelle .
In the present , Libby finds Diondra and the daughter she had with Ben .
She finds her mother 's ruby necklace in Diondra 's bathroom and realizes she is in danger .
Diondra 's daughter attacks her , but she manages to escape the house .
She finds out about Diehl 's involvement from Wirth , whose club has been working on the Angel of Debt case .
Libby visits Ben again in prison , and they apologize to each other .
She realizes he was trying to protect his unborn daughter by taking the rap for Michelle 's murder .
A news report confirms that Diondra has been arrested , and the film closes with Libby returning to look at the family farm where she grew up .
CAST
* Charlize Theron as Libby Day * Sterling Jerins as young Libby Day
* Christina Hendricks as Patty Day * Nicholas Hoult as Lyle Wirth
* Andrea Roth as Diondra Wertzner
* Chloë Grace Moretz as young Diondra Wertzner
* Corey Stoll as Ben Day
* Tye Sheridan as young Ben Day
* Sean Bridgers as Runner Day * Drea de Matteo as Krissi Cates
* Addy Miller as young Krissi Cates
* Shannon Kook as young Trey Teepano * Richard Gunn as Lou Cates
* Dan Hewitt Owens as Robert * Glenn Morshower as Jim Jeffreys PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Principal photography commenced in late August 2013 in Shreveport and Minden , Louisiana .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Dark Places was released in France on April 8 , 2015 .
In November 2014 , it was announced A24 Films and DirecTV Cinema had acquired rights to the film .
The film began airing on DirecTV Cinema on June 18 , 2015 , and was released in limited release and through video on demand on August 7 , 2015 .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
The film received mixed to negative reviews from critics .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a 25 % approval rating based on 77 reviews , with an average rating of 4.8/10 .
Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigns a score of 39 out of 100 , based on 19 critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews " .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The film grossed a meager total of $ 208,588 in the United States from 151 venues over the course of two weeks .
Overseas , the film earned $ 3,304,354 for a worldwide total of $ 3,512,942 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS