I AM THEY
I Am
They is an American contemporary Christian music band from Carson City , Nevada , formed in 2011 .
The band consists of five members and are signed to Essential Records .
Their self - titled debut album was released in 2015 .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
I Am They , a Christian band from Carson City , Nevada was initially formed as a worship ministry called " Solomon 's Porch " for what was intended to be a single night worship gathering on October 31 , 2008 , hosted at Calvary Chapel Carson City .
After a positive reception from the local church community , the band continued holding bi - monthly worship gatherings .
After receiving an offer from local Christian concert promoters , Ian Bullis and Jonathan Velasquez , to open for CCM artist Matthew West in January 2009 , the band began to write original material and formally changed their name to I Am They in order to differentiate it from the bi - monthly worship ministry they hosted .
The band signed to Provident Label Group in the summer of 2013 and went into the studio in January 2014 to record their self - titled debut at Yackland Studios in Nashville , TN with Producer Jonathan Smith and Executive Producer Jason Ingram .
Their debut album released on January 27 , 2015 .
In winter and spring of 2015 , the band was a part of the national touring " Rock & Worship Roadshow " alongside MercyMe , Crowder , and Group 1 Crew , followed by a tour with Matt Maher on the spring leg of the Saints & Sinners tour .
In August 2015 , I Am They received a Dove Award nomination for New Artist of the Year .
In March 2016 , Abbie Parker replaced Stephanie Kulla as the lead female vocalist for the band .
On the same day , the band released a new single " Make A Way " featuring Abbie Parker .
I Am
They released the 4-song worship EP The Resting Place - EP in June 2016 .
In April 2017 , a new vocalist , Houston resident Jon McConnell , was introduced with the release of the band 's new song , Crown Him .
MEMBERS Section::::Members .
Current members
* Jon McConnell - vocals , guitar , keys * Matthew Hein - vocals , guitar , banjo , dobro , mandolin
* Abbie Parker - vocals , harmonium * Justin Shinn - keys , organ , concert drum , banjo , mandolin * Sara Palmer - drums , percussion
Former members
* Stephanie Kulla - vocals * Bobby Stiehler - bass , percussion * Raul Aguilar Jr. - bass * Adam Palmer - vocals , guitar , Nashville high - strung guitar , banjo , dobro , concert drum DISCOGRAPHY
ALBUMS
USChrist !
scope="row"I Am
They
* Released : January 27 , 2015
* Format : CD , digital download 10 !
scope="row"Trial & Triumph
* Released : March 2 , 2018 * Format : CD , digital download 23 SINGLES USChristUSChrist Air .
REFERENCES