THE HUNTSMAN :
WINTER 'S WAR
The Huntsman :
Winter 's War is a 2016 American fantasy adventure film , both a prequel and sequel to Snow White and the Huntsman ( 2012 ) , it takes place before and after the events of the first film .
The film is the directorial debut of Cedric Nicolas - Troyan , who was a visual effects supervisor and second unit director on the first film .
It is written by Craig Mazin and Evan Spiliotopoulos , based on characters created by Evan Daugherty , which like the first film were inspired by the fairy tale " Snow White " compiled by the Brothers Grimm , as well as " The Snow Queen " by Hans Christian Andersen .
Reprising their roles from the first film , the cast includes Chris Hemsworth , Charlize Theron , Nick Frost , and Sam Claflin .
The film also introduced new characters played by Emily Blunt , Jessica Chastain , and Rob Brydon .
The film premiered in Hamburg on March 29 , 2016 , and was released in the United States on April 22 , 2016 .
It received mixed to negative reviews from critics and audiences alike , with praise for the visuals and cast but many feeling the film was an unnecessary sequel .
It grossed $ 165 million worldwide against an estimated $ 115 million production cost .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Evil sorceress
Queen Ravenna 's powers allow her to know that her younger sister Freya , whose powers have not yet emerged , is not only involved in an illicit affair with an already elsewhere engaged nobleman Andrew , but is also pregnant with his child .
Sometime after Freya gives birth to a baby girl , Freya discovers that Andrew not only reneged on his promise of elopement with her but also murdered their child .
In a grief - fueled rage , her broken heart freezes over and she kills him with her sudden emergence of powers - the elemental control of ice .
Freya abandons her sister 's kingdom and builds herself a new kingdom up North .
Ruling as the much feared Ice Queen , Freya orders children to be abducted so they can be trained to avoid the pain of love ( as she suffered ) , and to be an army of fearsome huntsmen to conquer for her .
Despite the training , two of her best huntsmen , Eric and Sara , grow up and fall in love , secretly bind , and plan to escape to a free life together .
Freya discovers their secret and confronts them , creates a massive ice wall to separate them , then casts Eric out of her kingdom after first forcing him to watch as Sara is killed by one of their fellow huntsmen .
Seven years later , and after Ravenna 's death , Queen Snow White falls ill after hearing Ravenna 's Magic Mirror beckoning her .
Because of its overwhelming dark magic , she ordered it to be taken to Sanctuary , the magical place that sheltered Snow White during the events leading to her retaliation and ultimately Ravenna 's death , so the mirror 's magic can forever be contained .
Snow White 's husband , William , informs Eric that the soldiers tasked with carrying the Mirror went missing while en route to the Sanctuary .
Eric realizes that he is being spied upon by Freya through sorcery ( via a magical ice owl ) .
Knowing the dark magic of the mirror can make Freya even stronger , perhaps invincible even , Eric agrees to investigate and attempt to retrieve the mirror .
Reluctantly though , he allows Snow White 's dwarf ally Nion and his annoying half - brother Gryff to come along .
While travelling to the last known location of the soldiers , they discover they seemingly attacked each other .
At a tavern later , the trio are attacked by a group of Freya 's huntsmen , but are rescued by a very much still alive Sara .
Sara reveals that she was imprisoned by Freya the entire time , only to escape recently .
They decipher that Eric was falsely made to see Sara 's death , while she was made to see him abandoning her rather than fighting to help .
Eric convinces her that Freya conjured these visions to trick them apart , and eventually has Sara join with him and the dwarves to thwart Freya .
Soon , in a surprise attack , the quartet is ensnared in a trap set by she - dwarves Bromwyn and Doreena .
They convince the she - dwarves to also help them find the Mirror , and the two lead them to the goblins that stole the mirror from Snow White 's soldiers .
The party fight off the goblins and retrieve the Mirror .
As the group nears the Sanctuary with the Mirror , they are ambushed by Freya and her huntsmen .
Freya reveals Sara has been loyal to her all along , and that Sara was using her companions to find the Mirror for her .
In the ensuing chaos , Nion and Doreena are turned into ice statues , and Sara shoots an arrow into Eric 's chest on Freya 's order , killing him .
Freya departs with the Magic Mirror , but she is unaware that Sara intentionally missed so that Eric could live .
Back in her palace , Freya recites the iconic verse associated with the Mirror , resurrecting Ravenna , who became one with the Mirror when Snow White vanquished her into it .
Boasting a new suite of powers thanks to the Mirror 's powerful magic , Ravenna usurps Freya 's rule by coordinating Freya 's huntsmen and army to reclaim the kingdoms Snow White had liberated .
Eric infiltrates the ice palace with help of Gryff and Bromwyn .
He attempts to assassinate Freya , but is stopped by Ravenna .
When Freya realizes that Sara did n't actually kill Eric , betrayed , she reluctantly sentences them both to death because of Ravenna 's manipulation .
However , Eric is able to convince a few huntsmen to rebel , claiming the love of life - long brethren .
Ravenna begins to kill the huntsmen .
Freya , realizing that she regards the huntsmen as her own surrogate " children " , protects them with an ice wall , separating the huntsmen from the sisters .
As Eric , Sara and the other huntsmen climb over the wall to fight Ravenna and retrieve the mirror , the two sisters argue over the icy kingdom .
Ravenna lets slip that she 's responsible for withdrawing her sister 's weakness , awakening her powers .
Freya , now suspicious , forces Ravenna ( who as the mirror 's captive spirit must answer her summoner 's questions truthfully ) to reveal that the mirror had told her that Freya 's child would eventually be more beautiful than Ravenna , that she enchanted Andrew to kill the baby , ultimately causing the death of Freya 's child so she could remain ' the fairest of them all ' .
Freya , outraged by her sister 's evil deception and betrayal , finally turns against her .
Freya is impaled by Ravenna , but with her remaining strength Freya freezes the Magic Mirror .
Eric takes advantage and shatters the Mirror , thus destroying Ravenna .
As Freya dies from her wounds , she smiles at the sight of a vision of her old loving self , and gladly witnesses
Eric and Sara 's devotion for each other .
With Freya 's death , those who had been imprisoned by Freya 's magic are set free , including Nion and Doreena , while a mysterious golden bird flies overhead .
Eric , Sara and the huntsmen look forward to a new future while the dwarves pair off romantically and Eric and Sara share a kiss , finally happy to have a free life together for the first time in their lives .
In a post - credits scene , Snow White with a crown on her head is seen from behind .
The aforementioned bird flies and lands on the balcony next to her .
Snow White 's own magical spy / scryer .
( Though this scene seems to have been excised from consequent broadcast versions . )
CAST * Chris Hemsworth as Eric , a Huntsman * Charlize Theron as Queen Ravenna , Snow White 's evil stepmother who returns from the dead .
* Emily Blunt as Freya , Ravenna 's sister .
* Jessica Chastain as Sara , a warrior who is Eric 's wife .
* Nick Frost as Nion , a Dwarf who previously helped Eric and Snow White defeat Ravenna 's army .
* Rob Brydon as Gryff , a debt - collecting Dwarf who is Nion 's half - brother .
* Sheridan Smith as Mrs. Bromwyn , a feisty and greedy Dwarf who becomes allies with Nion and Gryff .
* Alexandra Roach as Doreena , a shy and gentle Dwarf and Nion 's love interest .
* Sam Claflin as King William , Snow White 's husband who helped her and Eric defeat Ravenna 's army .
* Sope Dirisu as Tull , a fellow Huntsman .
* Sam Hazeldine as Liefr , a fellow Huntsman .
* Sophie Cookson as Pippa , a fellow Huntswoman .
* Conrad Khan as Young Eric
* Niamh Walter as Young Sara
* Fred Tatasciore as Mirror Man , the physical form of the Magic Mirror .
* Colin Morgan as Andrew , the Duke of Blackwood and Freya 's lover .
* Madeleine Worrall as Eric 's Mother .
* Kristen Stewart as Snow White ( uncredited , archive footage )
* Liam Neeson as The Narrator ( uncredited ) PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
A sequel to Snow White and the Huntsman was initially planned with director Rupert Sanders in talks to return .
The sequel plans were changed in August 2012 to a spin - off film concentrating on the Huntsman instead .
Universal announced a few days later that they were not shelving the sequel .
Another report stated that Universal authorised a sequel with Stewart set to reprise her role , but without Sanders to return as the director .
A script was written and production was set to begin at some point in 2013 , with the film to be released in 2015 .
On June 4 , 2014 , Deadline reported that Frank Darabont , Gavin O'Connor and Andrés Muschietti were on the shortlist to direct a sequel .
On June 26 , 2014 , Deadline confirmed that Darabont was in talks to direct the sequel .
On July 31 , 2014 , it was announced that the film would be a prequel titled Huntsman and would not star Stewart as Snow White .
Two years later , Stewart said that she voluntarily turned down an offer from the studio to provide a cameo in the film .
On January 16 , 2015 , it was announced that Darabont had exited the film after he parted with Universal .
Hemsworth and Theron were set to return for the film , while Emily Blunt was being circled for a new role .
On January 20 , 2015 , it was confirmed that VFX specialist Cedric Nicolas - Troyan was set to direct the film , whose last draft was written by Darabont , following drafts by Craig Mazin and Evan Spiliotopoulos .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
On February 24 , 2015 , Jessica Chastain was set to star in the film , Nick Frost was confirmed to reprise his previous role , while Blunt , who had been rumored to be interested , finally closed a deal to star as well .
On March 18 , 2015 , it was revealed that Sheridan Smith , Rob Brydon , and Alexandra Roach were added to the cast to play dwarves alongside Frost 's character Nion .
TheWrap confirmed on May 7 , 2015 , that Sam Claflin would return as William in the sequel .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography on the film began on April 6 , 2015 .
Filming took place at Waverley Abbey in Surrey , England in April 2015 .
Filming also occurred from May to July 2015 in Windsor Great Park , England , at locations including South Forest , Johnson 's Pond and in the Deer Park near Snow Hill .
Filming was also done in Wells Bishop 's Palace and Wells Cathedral .
In July 2015 , filming also took place at Puzzlewood , in the Forest of Dean .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
On October 8 , 2015 , it was officially announced , that James Newton Howard would return to score the film , after creating the music for Snow White and the Huntsman .
The score album was released on April 22 , 2016 .
Singer Halsey promoted the film by releasing an alternate version of her song " Castle " , along with a subsequent music video , made for the film .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
On July 31 , 2014 , Universal Pictures announced the film 's release date would be April 22 , 2016 .
In February 2016 , it was announced that the film would be released in 3D in international markets like Germany .
In Poland , the theatrical release was scheduled for April 8 , 2016 , which was the date for many other international markets .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
On November 16 , 2015 , Universal Pictures unveiled four character posters for the film , along with the film 's new title , The Huntsman :
Winter 's War .
Three days later , on November 18 , 2015 , the first official trailer of the film was released , along with two additional teaser posters .
A second trailer debuted on February 11 , 2016 .
Universal released a final trailer on March 22 , 2016 .
Hemsworth , Theron , and Chastain introduced a performance by Halsey of " Castle " at the 2016 MTV Movie Awards .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The Huntsman :
Winter 's War was released on Digital HD on August 2 , 2016 , and was followed by a release on Blu - ray and DVD on August 23 , 2016 .
The film debuted at No . 1 on the home video sales chart .
A Blu - ray extended edition ( with DVD & digital HD ) was also released with a run time of 120 minutes .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The Huntsman :
Winter 's War grossed $ 48.4 million in North America and $ 116.6 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 165 million , against a production budget of $ 115 million .
NORTH AMERICA Section::::North America .
In the United States and Canada , early tracking suggested the film would open to $ 24–30 million , which was significantly lower than its predecessor 's $ 56.2 million opening in 2012 .
The film opened in 3,791 theaters and grossed $ 7.3 million on its first day , including $ 1 million from its early Thursday night previews .
In its opening weekend , it grossed a lower - than - expected $ 19.4 million , which was about 64 % less than the original film 's opening .
Due to its underperforming opening weekend , the film lost Universal $ 30–40 million , with some estimates having the total losses at up to $ 70 million .
The Hollywood Reporter estimated the film lost the studio at least $ 75 million , when factoring together all expenses and revenues .
OUTSIDE
NORTH AMERICA Section::::Outside North America .
Internationally , The Huntsman :
Winter 's War was released in a total of 65 countries .
There were some estimates that the film will end its run at about $ 150 million internationally , which is lower than its predecessor 's total of $ 240 million .
One notable difference is that while Winter 's War has secured a release date in China , Snow White and the Huntsman did not play there , and analysts believe that could make " some difference " .
It was released in 18 countries two weeks ahead of its U.S. debut , earning $ 19.1 million from 3,969 screens , and had No . 1 openings in eleven of them , and second overall at the international box office charts , behind the superhero film .
In its second weekend , it added 7 new markets and grossed a total of $ 17.8 million , falling only by 8 % from its previews weekend , and still remained at No . 2 , behind The Jungle Book .
It was still No . 2 in its third weekend .
Its top openings occurred in China ( $ 10.4 million ) , the United Kingdom and Ireland ( $ 4.2 million ) , Brazil ( $ 3.1 million ) , Mexico ( $ 2.8 million ) , France ( $ 2.6 million ) , Korea ( $ 2.1 million ) , Russia ( $ 2 million ) , the Philippines ( $ 1.6 million ) , Malaysia ( $ 1.6 million ) , Spain ( $ 1.4 million ) , and Thailand ( $ 1.2 million ) .
In China , it was in third place , behind local pic Yesterday Once More and the continued run of The Jungle Book .
It lost a tremendous number of screens in its second weekend due to the arrival of three new local pics – Book of Love , Phantom of the Theater and MBA Partners – along with the continued run of The Jungle Book and as a result it grossed just $ 710,000 .
In terms of total earnings , its largest markets outside of North America are China ( $ 15.6 million ) , the UK ( $ 7.3 million ) and Mexico ( $ 7.2 million ) .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On Rotten Tomatoes the film has a rating of 17 % , based on 199 reviews , with an average rating of 4.2/10 .
The site 's consensus reads , " The Huntsman :
Winter 's War is visually arresting and boasts a stellar cast , but neither are enough to recommend this entirely unnecessary sequel .
"
On Metacritic , the film has a score of 35 out of 100 , based on 41 critics , indicating " generally unfavourable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B+ " on an A+ to F scale .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Award !
Category !
Recipient(s ) !
Result ! Ref(s )
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS