THE FUNDAMENTALS OF CARING
The Fundamentals of Caring is a 2016 American comedy - drama film written and directed by Rob Burnett , based on the 2012 novel
The Revised Fundamentals of Caregiving by Jonathan Evison and stars Paul Rudd , Craig Roberts , and Selena Gomez .
The film had its world premiere at the Sundance Film Festival on January 29 , 2016 and was released by Netflix on June 24 , 2016 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Ben is a retired writer .
Needing a new job , he takes a six - week course to become a caregiver .
He gets a job from an English woman named Elsa , a registered caregiver and an office manager at a bank , whose 18-year - old son Trevor suffers from Duchenne muscular dystrophy .
Trevor is a sardonic , anxious boy fascinated by American roadside attractions , and Ben suggests that they see several .
Trevor initially refuses , and Elsa worries
Ben is becoming too close to him .
Trevor 's father left when he was diagnosed , only sending him letters throughout the years .
Ben is hounded by a court tracker hired by his wife and avoids his visits .
Eventually , Elsa agrees with Ben 's road trip plan , and he and Trevor embark on a journey to the world 's deepest pit .
On the way there , Trevor says he wants to see his father , who owns a car dealership in Salt Lake City .
Stopping at a gas station , the two meet a girl
Trevor 's age named Dot , who Trevor develops a crush on .
When they encounter her again at a diner later on , they see her attempting to hitchhike , and Ben gives her a ride .
Dot informs them on the way that she is heading to Denver to restart her life , and that her mother has died .
As the three bond , especially she and Trevor , Ben notices a car that has been following them .
At a motel , Ben speculates it is someone sent by his wife .
Further down the highway , the three find a pregnant woman named Peaches , whose car has broken down .
She is heading to live with her mother before the baby comes , as the father is currently on his second U.S. military tour .
They give her a ride .
When they stop for the night , Trevor asks Dot on a date , and the two go to the diner across the street .
Ben and Peaches watch through from the motel through the diner window and can see it is going well .
The next day , the four arrive at Trevor 's father 's car dealership .
Trevor 's father stays distant and explains he never wrote him letters ; it was his mother the whole time .
Outraged , Trevor berates Ben and tells him he wishes to go home , but Dot insists they continue to the world 's deepest pit .
The group eventually arrive , in awe of the abyss .
Trevor , Dot , and Peaches head to the bottom , but Ben notices the car that has been following them .
He walks over and finds it is Dot 's father , who wishes to make sure she is safe .
Ben receives a call from Dot , who tells him to quickly come down .
When he sees a crowd gathered at the bottom of the pit , he worries and finds Peaches has gone into labor .
Despite being tormented by the memory of his son 's death , he helps deliver the baby .
Peaches thanks him as she and her newborn son are taken to the hospital .
In the parking lot , Dot sees her father , walks up to him , and the two reconcile .
When she comes back , she says she wishes to go the rest of the journey with her father .
The three say their goodbyes , and Dot kisses Trevor before she leaves , promising they 'll text .
With the assistance of the ambulance staff , Trevor fulfills a wish of peeing standing over the pit railing .
Ben and Trevor make it home safely , and having finally coped with the loss of his son , Ben meets his estranged wife and gives her the divorce papers .
He continues writing , his next novel being about Trevor .
He narrates his writing the last few lines , informing the audience that he eventually quit as Trevor 's caregiver , but the two remained friends .
On Trevor 's 21st birthday , Ben went into his room to find Trevor lying dead on the floor and his new caregiver crying on the floor next to him , only to find out Trevor was faking .
The caregiver quit the next day .
CAST
* Paul Rudd as Ben * Craig Roberts as Trevor
* Selena Gomez as Dot * Jennifer Ehle as Elsa
* Megan Ferguson as Peaches * Frederick Weller as Bob * Bobby Cannavale as Cash * Julia Denton as Janet PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On October 11 , 2012 , Worldwide Pants ' Rob Burnett and Jon Beckerman acquired the film rights to Jonathan Evison 's novel
The Revised Fundamentals of Caregiving .
Burnett would adapt and direct the film .
On January 7 , 2015 , Paul Rudd was added to the cast to play the male lead , which Donna Gigliotti and James Spies would produce .
On January 13 , Selena Gomez also joined the film .
On December 7 , it was announced that the original title , The Revised Fundamentals of Caregiving , had been changed to The Fundamentals of Caring .
It was later revealed Bobby Cannavale and Frederick Weller had been cast in the film .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Filming began on January 22 , 2015 , in Atlanta , Georgia .
In early February filming took place in Cartersville , Georgia .
Filming concluded on February 26 , 2015 , after 26 days of filming .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film had its world premiere at the 2016 Sundance Film Festival as the Closing Night Film .
In January 2016 , prior to the film 's premiere at the festival Netflix acquired global distribution rights to the film .
It was released on Netflix on June 24 , 2016 .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
On Rotten Tomatoes the film has a rating of 78 % , based on 32 reviews , with an average rating of 6.3/10 .
On Metacritic the film has a score of 55 out of 100 , based on 10 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Fundamentals of Caring on Netflix