FAUDA Fauda ( فوضى ; means " chaos " in Arabic ) is an Israeli political thriller television series .
In the summer of 2016 , the satellite network yes officially picked up season 2 of the show , stating it will focus more on real world events .
During the fall of 2017 the initial trailer was released , and the official premier date was later announced to be 31 December .
A few weeks prior to the airing of season 2 , Fauda was renewed for a third season , to air in 2019 .
The series is distributed by the online streaming service Netflix , billed as a Netflix original program , and premiered on 2 December 2016 .
The series available on Netflix is identical to that which aired in Israel , with only the addition of subtitles / dubbed language , and a new Netflix opening .
Season 2 was added to Netflix in May 2018 .
In 2016 , the show took six awards , including Best Drama Series , at the Israeli Academy Awards .
In December 2017 , The New York Times voted Fauda the best international show of 2017 .
In 2018 , the show took 11 Israeli TV Academy Awards , including best TV drama , best actor for Lior Raz and also best screenplay , casting , cinematography , recording , special effects and in other categories .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Eighteen months prior to the start of the show , Doron and his unit were credited with killing Taufiq Hammed .
Following being credited with the kill , Doron retires from service in order to grow a vineyard .
At the beginning of season 1 however , Doron is visited by Moreno , who informs him that Taufiq Hammed is still alive and plans to attend his brother Bashir 's wedding .
Doron rejoins his team in order to go undercover at the wedding .
Ultimately they are discovered and Bashir is killed , moments before Taufiq is to arrive .
Although Doron is able to shoot Taufiq , and injures him , Taufiq escapes .
Taufiq barely survives the gunshot wound and is forced to have secret emergency surgery so as to not reveal that he is alive or where he is .
Doron convinces Moreno to allow him to stay on with the unit until they catch Taufiq .
Bashir 's family all mourn him as a shahid ( martyr ) ; his wife , Amal , vows revenge .
Taufiq 's right - hand man , Walid , convinces his cousin Shirin to help Taufiq escape from the hospital minutes before Doron 's team arrives .
Amal , distraught over Bashir 's death , volunteers to bomb a nightclub which Boaz , Doron 's brother - in - law and a member of his unit , frequents .
This will ensure that the Israelis get the message that it is revenge on Boaz for the killing of her new husband .
The plan is for Amal to arm the bomb in her purse and then leave the club three minutes before its detonation .
However , Amal decides to stay and die in the explosion .
Boaz regains consciousness following the blast and finds his girlfriend 's body .
Boaz does not handle the discovery well , and after getting pulled over , physically assaults the police and ends up in jail .
While on a mission , Boaz gets captured and is held hostage by Hamas .
Doron and his team decide to prepare an unapproved mission to kidnap Sheikh Awadalla in an attempt to get Boaz back .
When Doron finds out that Taufiq had a bomb implanted inside of Boaz , Steve and Nurit kidnap Taufiq 's daughter to use as additional leverage .
Ultimately Boaz and the Sheikh both get blown up , and Taufiq 's daughter gets badly injured .
Doron , still undercover , interviews for a position to be a shahid for Taufiq , a role which he ultimately gets recruited for .
Taufiq reveals his plan to Walid : they received sarin nerve gas that will be detonated in the synagogue , which will cause Israel to retaliate with force , committing war crimes and forcing other Islamic states to respond .
Walid eventually discovers Doron 's true identity and orders Doron to be killed , however the rest of the unit shows up just in time to kill everyone who was watching him .
Walid shows the proof to Taufiq and then shoots him in the back of the head .
CHARACTERS
MAIN DORON KAVILLIO Section::::Characters . Section::::Main .
Section::::Doron Kavillio .
Portrayed by Lior Raz .
Doron is married to Gali , and has a son , Ido , and a daughter , Noga .
Doron , after leaving the army , lives on a farm and grows grapes in order to make his own wine .
Doron having previously been credited with killing Abu Ahmad , rejoins his old Israel Defense Force ( IDF ) unit , 18 months later , after intelligence discovered Abu Ahmad was still alive .
Gali , behind Doron 's back , has been having an affair with a fellow member of his unit , Naor .
His son , Ido , eventually finds out about the affair while listening in on a phone conversation , and later sees them kissing on the couch from upstairs .
Ido eventually pulls Naor 's gun on him stating that his father is not there because of him , which Doron interrupts , and Ido tells Doron that they are together .
When Doron asks Gali what it means , she tells him that he stopped fighting for her a long time ago , and that Naor loves her .
After Boaz 's girlfriend gets killed , Doron wants to try and keep Boaz out of the field for his own safety .
When Boaz is captured during his first field mission following the loss Doron takes it very personally and blames Moreno for it , physically attacking him in the command center .
Doron , although having previously quit smoking begins smoking again to help cope with the stress of the Boaz situation .
Ultimately Doron comes up with a plan to kidnap Sheikh Awadalla , and Taufiq 's daughter Abir , in order to exchange for Boaz , although it ultimately proved unsuccessful .
Steve later takes Doron to Boaz 's grave where he cries while reciting Kaddish .
After Boaz 's bomb is detonated Doron begins to wander the streets aimlessly , before taking shelter in a mosque .
Doron wounded after the Boaz 's and Sheikh 's bombs explode , ultimately winds up at Shirin 's apartment for treatment , after which they passionately kiss .
Shirin however eventually walks out during a date with Doron when she received a video from Walid showing her who Doron really is .
Doron , just prior to shooting the person sent to kill Shirin , finds out from him that Taufiq is looking for a man to be a shahid .
Doron goes and interviews with Walid and Taufiq for the position , and is handed a phone to be called when needed .
Before he can complete his mission , he is arrested and brought back to Israel , but ultimately answers Walid 's call while in jail .
Gabi convinces Gideon to allow Doron to complete his mission , and if successful would receive a full pardon .
TAUFIQ HAMMED Section::::Taufiq Hammed .
Portrayed by Hisham Sulliman .
Taufiq is commonly referred to as Abu Ahmad , and is nicknamed " The Panther " .
He is married to Nassrin and had a son ( Ahmad ) , a daughter ( Abir ) .
Taufiq had been trained by Ali Karmi , since he was a kid , and considers him a father , however he ordered Ali to be killed , when Ali turned his back on him and gave information over to Israel in exchange for surgery for his daughter .
Taufiq , is a high level Hamas terrorist , who was assumed killed by the IDF 18 months prior to the beginning of the show , only to find out he is still alive and arranging terror attacks , despite having had a funeral .
Taufiq emerges from hiding , and is seen for the first time by his family since his funeral , in order to congratulate his brother on his upcoming wedding .
Taufiq is credited with killing 116 Israelis .
Taufiq does not see his family for several years while in hiding , and was willing to risk his life just to see Nassrin immediately after surgery .
Despite this , when forced to choose between exploding the bomb inside Boaz and Abir 's safety , he reluctantly chooses to have Walid detonate the bomb .
When Nassrin tells Taufiq that she can not live this life anymore and is taking the kids back to Berlin , Taufiq attempts to talk her out of it .
When his mother later calls to say that the kids and her passports were gone , Taufiq is brought to tears .
Taufiq throughout season 1 is planning for something big , later revealed that they will use sarin nerve gas to detonated in the synagogue , which will cause Israel to retaliate with force , committing war crimes , which will force the other Islamic states to respond .
After Walid uncovers that the man they hired to be the shahid for their mission was actually Doron , Walid returns to show Taufiq , then shoots him in the head from behind .
WALID AL ABED Section::::Walid Al Abed .
Portrayed by Shadi Mar'i .
Walid as of season 1
he is 20 years old .
Walid is a trusted member is Taufiq 's team , and one of the few who knows the truth about him being alive after his funeral .
Taufiq views Walid like a son to him , and eventually Taufiq wants Walid to replace him .
Walid however eventually winds up killing Taufiq , shooting him in the head from behind , however after shooting him , Walid cries and kisses Taufiq .
Walid puts the Hamas cause above everything else , including family , as he eventually shows by kidnapping his aunt and cousin to further their cause .
Although always wanting to follow through on what Taufiq tells him , when it comes to his family , Walid will not hurt them .
When ordered to find Shirin and bring her back to Taufiq , Walid questions her but ultimately reports back that he is unable to find her .
When Walid was a kid he used to wait for Shirin to return from Paris so she could take him to the park .
Walid feels that he never knew what true love was until he met Shrin .
When ordered to kill Shirin by Taufiq , Walid instead asks her to marry him , as a way to protect her .
Shirin eventually reluctantly agrees and says yes , but pulls away when he tries to kiss her .
Shirin later tells him that they are cousins
and she can not marry him because she does n't love him .
Walid believes this is because she is in love with Amir , and once Walid finds out who Amir really is , Walid sends Shirin the proof that Amir is Doron , and she walks out on him during a date .
DR .
SHIRIN AL ABED
Section::::Dr .
Shirin Al Abed .
Portrayed by Laëtitia Eïdo .
Shirin is 32 years old as of season 1 , and a cousin of Walid .
Her mother is from Nablus , her father is from Paris .
She volunteered with Doctors Without Borders in 2006 .
She studied medicine at An - Najah National University , and works in the emergency room of Rafidia Surgery Hospital .
She is a widow , who was originally married at age 23 to a chemist , named Naji , who died four years later , from multiple sclerosis .
She spent more of her life in Paris than in Israel , and left Paris after Naji died to be closer to her mother .
Shirin , although has feelings for Doron is hesitant to accept his advances , but ultimately agrees to a date with him .
After Doron left their date early , Shirin is put off by his advances and sends the flowers he gave her as an apology , to the pediatric ward .
After Doron comes to her apartment for treatment , Doron kisses Shirin , to which she returns the kiss and quickly slips out of her dress .
Shirin eventually walks out during a date with Doron when she receives a video from Walid showing who Doron really is .
Shirin ultimately helps Taufiq escape from the hospital based on Walid 's insistence , however does so only for family , not because she believes in the cause .
When Walid later calls Shirin and asks her to stitch up Taufiq , she refuses as she does not want to be involved .
Shirin later performs reluctantly performs surgery on Boaz , after Walid kidnaps her and takes her mother as hostage until she performs the surgery .
Following the surgery she calls Walid and insists that she must be able to check up on him to ensure he does not have an infection .
Shirin admitted to Doron what she did , thinking he is a member of the Palestinian Preventive Security .
After Doron 's unit reveals to Walid they know he planted a bomb inside Boaz , Taufiq orders the killing of Shirin , but she is ultimately saved by Doron , when he kills the men Taufiq sent .
After the men sent to kill Shirin did not return , Taufiq ordered Walid to find Shirin and kill her .
Walid comes to Shirin 's hotel room and reveals that when was a kid he used to wait for her to return from Paris so she could take him to the park .
Walid feels that he never knew what true love was until he met Shrin , and instead of killing her asks her to marry him , as a way to protect her , to which she says she needs to think about .
Shirin eventually reluctantly agrees and says yes , but pulls away when he tries to kiss her .
Shirin later tells him that they are cousins
and she can not marry him because she does n't love him .
CAPTAIN GABI AYUB
Section::::Captain Gabi Ayub .
Portrayed by Itzik Cohen .
He has been divorced twice , and lives by himself .
He has five kids , with the youngest son being named Nadav , and has another son named Yiftah .
Gabi 's favorite time is , every year , when his family goes to the desert on vacation , and he has no mode of communication with those who are not with him .
MICKEY MORENO
Section::::Mickey Moreno .
Portrayed by Yuval Segal , commander of Doron 's former unit , who pulled him back in .
He is romantically involved with Nurit .
Following the issues which followed Boaz 's capture , Moreno met with Gideon Avital in order to tell him his futures plans for the unit , only to be told he was being let go , with the unit being disbanded .
Moreno ultimately blackmails Avital into giving him his unit back , or else he will reveal to the press that the two of them had shot five prisoners in the head in Gaza years ago .
GALI KAVILLIO Section::::Gali Kavillio .
Portrayed by Neta Garty .
Gali is Doron 's wife , and Boaz 's older sister .
She is very unhappy with their life and wishes she could move outside of Israel .
Gali is having an affair with a member of Doron 's unit , Naor , and says she is no longer in love with Doron .
Her son eventually finds out about the affair while listening in on their phone conversation , and later sees them kissing on the couch from upstairs .
Ido eventually pulls Naor 's gun on him stating that his father is not there because of him .
Gali later tells Doron that he stopped fighting for her years ago , and she was afraid of him .
NASSRIN HAMED Section::::Nassrin Hamed .
Portrayed by Hanan Hillo .
Nassrin is the wife of Taufiq , and her mother is Hafida .
Nassrin grew up in Germany .
Although she supports her husband 's mission , she wishes she could have her family intact .
After Abir was kidnapped and injured , Nassrin refuses to speak with Taufiq and demands that she go see her daughter in Israel , no matter what others will think .
Nassrin ultimately decides she can no longer live this life , and tells Taufiq that once Abir leaves the hospital she is taking the kids with her back to Berlin .
Following Abir 's surgery , Gabi presents Nassrin their passports and tells her they have a taxi outside ready for them to go to the airport , where he will arrange for their travel to Berlin .
BOAZ Section::::Boaz .
Portrayed by Tomer Kapon .
Boaz is fluent in Arabic , and is a member of Doron 's unit .
As a cover he states he works with Arabs in the Ministry of Defense .
He is Gali 's younger brother .
Although Boaz survives a bombing of the nightclub he frequents , his girlfriend , Daria , does not .
Unable to cope with the loss of Daria , Boaz drunkly destroys his apartment , then gets arrested while driving his motorcycle , and then beats up the cop .
Following this Boaz has trouble maintaining his temper and coping with day - to - day life , and always wears her necklace .
Although Doron wants to keep Boaz out of the field while he recovers , Moreno insists he returns to the field , where he ultimately gets captured on his first mission back .
While being questioned by Walid , Boaz states his name is Mohammad Abu Snina from Surda , and works for the Intelligence Agency , and provides documentation to support his story .
When questioned by Taufiq , Boaz is able to convince him that his story is legitimate but is ultimately discovered when Taufiq recognized his tattoo as the man who shot Bashir .
While captured , following surgery , Taufiq tells Boaz he took his kidney in order to give it to Ali Karmi 's daughter , only to later find out they really implanted a bomb .
Despite Doron 's best efforts Taufiq eventually gives the order to explode the bomb inside Boaz , killing him .
NAOR Section::::Naor .
Portrayed by Tzachi Halevy .
Naor is a member of Doron unit .
He has been having an affair with Doron 's wife for over a year .
When Gali mentions she is ready to leave Doron for him , he tells her to wait , because its complicated with Doron back in the unit .
Following the issues which followed Boaz 's capture , Moreno intended to make Naor team leader , before Moreno was also told the unit would be disbanded .
NURIT Section::::Nurit .
Portrayed by Rona - Lee Shim'on , is the sole female member of Doron 's unit .
She is romantically involved with Moreno .
Although her role always kept her behind the scenes , she wished to move into the field , and actively trains for the eventuality .
When she finally gets her chance , she is assigned to enter the women 's locker room in order to clone Shirin 's phone , and although nervous keeps composed whenever she is watched .
During her second opportunity in the field , an Arab woman attempts to stab Nurit , who she shoots in the arm ; when the woman attempts to stab her with the other arm Nurit is forced to fatally shoot her .
Although Nurit takes part in the mission to kidnap Sheikh Awadalla , she is shown emotionally crying while he is being tortured .
Following the issues which followed Boaz 's capture , Moreno informed Steve and Avihai that he was being discharged , then told Nurit that he felt she was forced into going and therefore he wanted to keep her on , before Moreno was later told the unit was being disbanded .
AVIHAI Section::::Avihai .
Portrayed by Boaz Konforty .
Avihai is a member of Doron 's unit , he has a wife and one son ( Guy ) .
Avihai considers himself like an attack dog , where he needs to always be ready to jump right into action , without thinking about the emotion .
Following the issues which followed Boaz 's capture , Moreno informed Avihai that he was being discharged , before Moreno was also told the unit would be disbanded .
STEVE PINTO Section::::Steve Pinto .
Portrayed by Doron Ben - David .
Steve is a member of Doron 's unit .
Although he goes by Steve , his birth name is Hertzel .
Steve has a crush on Nurit , and attempts to kiss her while staking out Abir .
Following the issues which followed Boaz 's capture , Moreno informed Steve that he was being discharged , before Moreno was told the unit would be disbanded .
Steve later brings Doron to Boaz 's grave , where he cries while reciting Kaddish .
RECURRING
* Ido Kavillio portrayed by Mel Malka , son of Doron and Gali .
Ido , eventually finds out about the affair his mother is having with Naor , while listening in on a phone conversation , and later sees them kissing on the couch from upstairs .
Ido eventually pulls Naor 's gun on him stating that his father is not there because of him .
After Doron stops him , Ido states that he should have killed him .
*
Jihan Hamed portrayed by Khawlah Hag - Debsy
*
Sheikh Awadalla portrayed by Salim Dau , is a spiritual leader and a close and trusted friend of Taufiq .
When Taufiq wants to exchange Boaz for Hamas members imprisoned by Israel , Sheikh is the man he wants to run negotiations with Egypt .
After Taufiq gives the order to detonate the bomb inside Boaz , Doron orders the bomb vest strapped to Sheikh to be detonated as well , killing him .
*
Gideon Avital portrayed by Uri Gavriel , is the Minister of Defense .
While in Gaza with Moreno , years prior to entering politics , they shot five prisoners in the head .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Fauda was developed by Lior Raz and Avi Issacharoff based on their experiences doing military service in the IDF 's Duvdevan Unit .
The series premiered on February 15 , 2015 .
It tells the story of Doron , a commander in the Mista'arvim unit , and his team as they try to catch a Hamas arch - terrorist known as " The Panther " .
The first season of the series was filmed in Kafr Qasim , during Operation Protective Edge .
EPISODES SUMMARY Section::::Episodes .
Section::::Summary .
SEASON 1
Section::::Season 1 . SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 . SEE ALSO
* Bethlehem
* Television in Israel REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS