TOMB RAIDER ( FILM ) Tomb Raider is a 2018 action - adventure film directed by Roar Uthaug , with a screenplay by Geneva Robertson - Dworet and Alastair Siddons , from a story by Evan Daugherty and Robertson - Dworet .
An American and British co - production , it is based on the 2013 video game of the same name , with some elements of its sequel by Crystal Dynamics , and is a reboot of the Tomb Raider film series .
The film stars Alicia Vikander as Lara Croft , who embarks on a perilous journey to her father 's last - known destination , hoping to solve the mystery of his disappearance .
Dominic West , Walton Goggins , Daniel Wu , and Kristin Scott Thomas appear in supporting roles .
Principal photography took place from January to June 2017 at the Warner Bros. Studios in the United Kingdom , and in Cape Town , South Africa .
The first Tomb Raider film not to be distributed by Paramount Pictures , it was released in the United Kingdom on March 14 , 2018 , and in the United States on March 16 , 2018 , by Warner Bros. Pictures , in RealD 3D , IMAX 3D , IMAX and 4DX .
The film grossed $ 273 million worldwide , just below the $ 274 million made by Angelina Jolie 's but more than its .
The film received mixed reviews from critics , with some describing the plot as " paint - by - numbers " , and others praising the action sequences , tone , grittiness and realistic take on the franchise .
Vikander 's performance was highly praised but the characterization of Croft drew a polarized response ; some described her as a " capable , powerful , and unobjectified heroine " , while others called her bland , and a " punching bag and onlooker . "
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Following the disappearance of her father , Lord Richard Croft , Lara Croft makes a living as a bike courier .
When she is arrested after a bike accident involving a police car , Richard 's business partner Ana Miller posts her bail .
After never claiming her inheritance for many years , believing her father to still be alive , Miller warns Lara that if she does not claim her vast inheritance , her father 's country estate , Croft Manor , will be sold off .
Lara reluctantly accepts and gains access to a secret chamber in her father 's tomb .
There she finds a pre - recorded video message from Richard detailing his research into Himiko , the mythical Queen of Yamatai who was said to command the power over life and death .
Richard warns Lara to destroy all of his research , but she ignores his warnings so that she can investigate further .
Lara travels to Hong Kong where she hires Lu Ren , captain of the ship Endurance , to sail into the Devil 's Sea and the island of Yamatai .
The ship capsizes in a violent storm and Lara is washed ashore where she is knocked unconscious .
She awakens only to encounter Mathias Vogel , the leader of an expedition to locate Himiko 's tomb .
The expedition has been funded by a shadowy organization called Trinity , which seeks to harness and weaponize Himiko 's power .
Vogel takes Lara prisoner , claiming that he killed her father and revealing that he intends to use Richard 's research to continue his expedition .
He adds Lara and Lu Ren to his slave force ; eventually , the two of them try to escape , and Lara is the only one successful .
After surviving rapids and narrowly avoiding getting thrown over a waterfall , Lara is forced to kill a Trinity guard after nightfall .
She follows a mysterious figure through the jungle , and discovers that the figure is her father , who stayed on the island to prevent Trinity from finding Himiko 's tomb .
After Lara convinces him that she is real and not a figment of his imagination , Richard treats her injuries .
Despite his protests , Lara sets off the next morning to recover his research from Vogel 's camp .
Lara makes contact with Lu Ren , and he , along with the other slaves , stage distractions that allow Lara to infiltrate the Trinity camp and recover her father 's journal .
In the ensuing chaos , Richard makes his way to Himiko 's tomb and is captured by Vogel , who persuades Lara to open the tomb .
The party navigates a series of booby traps and locates Himiko 's sarcophagus .
When a Trinity soldier attempts to remove her corpse , he is infected by a highly infectious pathogen that reduces those infected to an aggressive zombie - like state .
Lara realizes that Himiko was an asymptomatic carrier of the virus , who chose to entomb herself so that she could not infect others .
Vogel concludes that he can not remove Himiko 's body and instead settles for detaching a finger , which he seals in a pouch .
In the confusion , Lara and Richard overpower the remaining soldiers , though Vogel escapes and Richard becomes infected .
Knowing there is no cure , Richard proposes destroying Himiko 's tomb to prevent the disease from spreading across the world .
Lara pursues Vogel as Richard sets off a bomb , killing himself and sealing the tomb .
Lara confronts and kills Vogel by infecting him with the finger .
She escapes the tomb as it collapses , regrouping with Lu Ren and the slaves ; they commandeer a Trinity helicopter to escape Yamatai .
Lara returns to London , where she formally accepts her inheritance and inadvertently discovers that Trinity 's front company , Patna , is actually a subsidiary of Croft Holdings .
She proceeds to investigate Trinity further and begins to suspect that Ana is one of their agents who manipulated her into accepting her inheritance ; this was to have Lara sign over control of Croft Holdings ' business operations to her when Richard stopped cooperating with Trinity .
Having witnessed Trinity 's ruthlessness firsthand , she prepares for her next adventure .
CAST
* Alicia Vikander as Lara Croft * Maisy De Freitas as 7-year - old Lara * Emily Carey as 14-year - old Lara * Dominic West as Lord Richard Croft , Lara 's archaeologist father .
* Walton Goggins as Mathias Vogel , a rival archaeologist of Richard Croft , and a member of Trinity , a shadowy organization .
* Daniel Wu as Lu Ren , the ship captain who helps Lara to search for her father .
* Kristin Scott Thomas as Ana Miller , an associate at Richard Croft 's company , Croft Holdings .
* Derek Jacobi as Mr. Yaffe , an associate at Croft Holdings .
Section::::Cast .
Additionally , Nick Frost plays a pawn shop owner and Jaime Winstone his wife .
Hannah John - Kamen and Antonio Aakeel play Lara 's friends .
Duncan Airlie James plays Terry , a mixed martial arts club operator .
Josef Altin portrays Bruce , Lara 's boss , Billy Postlethwaite and Roger Nsengiyumva appear as Bill and Rog , Lara 's co - workers and opponents at the race and Michael Obiora portrays Baxter , the Croft Holdings ' receptionist .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
GK Films first acquired the rights to make the film in 2011 .
Norwegian director Roar Uthaug came on board in November 2015 , and Alicia Vikander was announced as the new Lara Croft in April 2016 .
Deadline Hollywood had previously reported that Daisy Ridley was considered for the role , though she later stated in an interview that it was just a " crazy rumor .
"
Walton Goggins was announced to play the villain in December 2016 , and much of the rest of the cast was revealed in early 2017 .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography on the film began on January 23 , 2017 , in Cape Town , South Africa , and ended on June 9 , 2017 , at Warner Bros. Studios , Leavesden .
Wilton House near Salisbury in Wiltshire was the location for exterior shots for Croft Manor .
The waterfall sequence involving the plane was filmed at a waterpark at Lee Valley , outside of London , at a venue that had been built for the 2012 Summer Olympics , and was combined with footage filmed in South Africa .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
On September 11 , 2017 , It was announced that Junkie XL signed on as the film 's composer after being removed from Justice League .
The soundtrack was released in digital and physical formats on March 9 , 2018 by Sony Classical Records with the Vinyl being released later on August 24 , 2018 .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Tomb Raider premiered on March 2 , 2018 , in Berlin , Germany , at an exclusive preview with invited guests and cosplaying fans .
It was released in the United States on March 16 , 2018 , by Warner Bros. Pictures , days after the fifth anniversary of the franchise 's video game reboot .
The film received an IMAX 3D and a RealD 3D release .
It also received an 4DX release in selected countries .
Outside the US , the film was released in most territories between March 8–16 , 2018 , in Japan on March 21 , 2018 , and in Poland on April 6 , 2018 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Tomb Raider was released on digital streaming platforms on May 29 , 2018 .
A 4 K UHD Blu - Ray , Blu - ray and DVD release occurred on June 12 , 2018 .
Australia received a DVD and Blu - Ray release on June 18 , 2018 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Tomb Raider grossed $ 57.4 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 216.1 million in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 273.5 million , against a production budget in the range of $ 90–106 million .
In order to break even , the film needed to gross at least $ 275 million worldwide .
In the United States and Canada , Tomb Raider was released alongside Love , Simon and I
Can Only Imagine , and was projected to gross $ 23–29 million from 3,854 theaters in its opening weekend .
The film made $ 9.1 million on its first day ( including $ 2.1 million from Thursday night previews ) .
It went on to open to $ 23.5 million , finishing second at the box office , behind Black Panther ( $ 27 million in its fifth week ) .
It fell 55 % to $ 10.6 million in its second weekend , finishing 5th at the box office .
It grossed $ 4.9 million in its third weekend , falling 51 % and finishing seventh .
Internationally , the film opened in nine Asian countries a week prior to its United States debut .
It made $ 14.2 million over the weekend , with Korea 's $ 2.9 million being the biggest market .
The film opened in China on March 16 , 2018 , and made $ 12.3 million the first day .
It was the fifth - highest - grossing day for a Warner Bros. film , opening 6 % higher than Wonder Woman , and went on to debut to $ 41 million .
, the film 's largest markets were China ( $ 78.4 million ) , the United Kingdom ( $ 10.4 million ) , France ( $ 10.1 million ) , and the CIS countries ( $ 7.5 million ) .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 51 % based on 274 reviews , and an average rating of 5.4/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Tomb Raider reboots the franchise with a more grounded approach and a star who 's clearly more than up to the task — neither of which are well served by an uninspired origin story .
" At the time of its release , it was the best - reviewed live - action video game film in the history of the site , before being surpassed by Rampage a month later .
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 48 out of 100 , based on 53 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews . "
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B " on an A+ to F scale , the same score earned by the 2001 film ; PostTrak reported filmgoers gave it a 70 % positive score .
Michael Phillips of the Chicago Tribune gave the film 2 out of 4 stars and said , " The Lara Croft reboot Tomb Raider is n't half bad for an hour .
Then there 's another hour .
That hour is quite bad .
It 's no fun watching your action heroine get shoved , punched and kicked to the sidelines of her own movie , while the menfolk take over and take turns overacting before expiring . "
Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter gave the film a mixed review , criticizing the story but praising Vikander , and writing , " When all the one - dimensional supporting characters and familiar action moves fall by the wayside , the one thing left standing is Vikander ...
The film strains credulity even for a vid - game fantasy by letting the leading lady recover awfully quickly from bad injuries , but other than that Vikander commands attention and is the element here that makes Tomb Raider sort of watchable . "
Matt Bobkin of Exclaim !
gave the film a 5 out of 10 score , writing " Tomb Raider is at its best when delivering mindless action , but do n't bother trying to glean any sort of deeper , subversive meaning . "
Owen Gleiberman of Variety praised the film , saying that " The exciting surprise of the new Tomb Raider , directed by the Norwegian genre specialist Roar Uthaug , is that it does n't tamp down Vikander 's inner flame , or the three - dimensionality of her talent ; it does n't fold and insert her into an overly gymnastic and CGI - happy thrill ride .
The movie is full of vine - swinging , bow - and - arrow - shooting , ancient - spirit - meeting action , but most of it is staged on a convincing human scale , one that 's been expertly tailored to its star 's understated directness . "
Matt Zoller Seitz of RogerEbert.com gave the film 3 out of 4 stars , and said , " this is a beautifully crafted and unpretentious piece of action cinema , with a number of sequences that are as gorgeous as they are thrilling , and a female hero who 's as elegant as she is deadly : an ass - kicking Audrey Hepburn . "
Retrospectively , some critics have argued that Tomb Raider was overly scrutinised by press compared to similar films in the same genre .
Editor in Large of IndieWire Anne Thompson theorised that it was n't marketed enough to smart women .
Thompson also wrote that Tomb Raider " was a well - mounted , intelligently wrought adventure , more grounded in the real world than its fantasy predecessors " and that " it establishes the action bonafides of both Vikander and director Roar Uthaug " FUTURE Section::::Future .
Alicia Vikander has expressed interest in returning as Lara Croft for a second film , stating that " If there 's an audience out there for it , then I would love to " .
In 2015 , Adrian Askarieh , producer of the Hitman films , stated that he hoped to oversee a shared universe of Square Enix films with Just Cause , Hitman , Tomb Raider , Deus Ex , and Thief , but admitted that he does not have the rights to Tomb Raider .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
!
scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Date ! scope="col " Category ! scope="col " Nominee(s ) ! scope="col " Result ! scope="col " ! scope="row " rowspan="2 " Teen Choice Awards REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS