FIFTY SHADES DARKER
( FILM ) Fifty Shades Darker is a 2017 American erotic romantic drama film directed by James Foley and written by Niall Leonard , based on E. L. James 's 2012 novel of the same name .
The second film in the Fifty Shades film series and the sequel to the 2015 film Fifty Shades of Grey , it stars Dakota Johnson and Jamie Dornan as Anastasia Steele and Christian Grey , respectively , with Eric Johnson , Eloise Mumford , Bella Heathcote , Rita Ora , Luke Grimes , Victor Rasuk , Kim Basinger , and Marcia Gay Harden in supporting roles .
Principal photography on Fifty Shades Darker and its sequel Fifty Shades Freed ( 2018 ) began on February 9 , 2016 , in Paris and Vancouver .
It was released in the United States on February 10 , 2017 .
The film grossed $ 381 million worldwide against its $ 55 million budget , but received negative reviews for its screenplay , acting and narrative , though Dakota Johnson 's performance received some praise .
At the 38th Golden Raspberry Awards , the film received nine nominations ; including Worst Picture , Worst Actor ( Dornan ) and Worst Actress ( Johnson ) , and won two for Worst Prequel , Remake , Rip - off or Sequel , and Worst Supporting Actress ( Basinger ) .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
After Anastasia Steele leaves Christian Grey , he has nightmares about his abusive childhood .
Meanwhile , Ana begins a new job as an assistant to Jack Hyde , an editor at Seattle Independent Publishing ( SIP ) whose previous three assistants all quit within the last 18 months .
Ana unexpectedly runs into Christian at the opening of her friend Jose Rodriguez 's photography exhibit .
She is dismayed that Christian bought all of Jose 's portraits of Ana .
Christian wants Ana back and agrees to her no rules , no punishments , and no more secret terms .
As Jack and Ana head for an after - work drink , Ana is approached on the street by a young woman resembling her .
Christian arrives at the bar and acts coolly towards Jack , then quickly departs with Ana in tow .
Ana dismisses Christian 's warning about Jack 's reputation .
She is annoyed that Christian is considering buying Seattle Independent Publishing ( SIP ) .
Jack tells Ana he expects her to accompany him on a New York book expo trip , but after speaking with Christian , she agrees not to attend .
Shortly after , Ana again notices the same woman observing her and Christian from a distance .
Christian deflects Ana 's inquiry about the woman 's identity , but later admits she is Leila Williams , a former submissive .
After their contract ended , Leila wanted more , but Christian ended the relationship .
Leila married a man who later died , causing Leila to have a mental breakdown .
She has been stalking Ana and Christian ever since .
Prior to the Grey family 's annual charity ball , Christian takes Ana to Esclava , a beauty salon owned by Elena Lincoln .
Elena , a family friend , is also Christian 's former dominant who introduced him to the BDSM lifestyle by seducing him when he was younger .
Ana is furious that Christian took her there and that Elena and Christian are business partners .
At the ball , Christian 's sister Mia mentions that her brother was expelled from four different schools for brawling .
Christian tells Ana that his mother committed suicide .
He was alone with her body for three days before being taken to the hospital where Grace Trevelyan Grey worked ; she cared for and later adopted the young boy .
During the ball , Ana rebuffs Elena 's demand that she leave Christian and warns Elena to stay away .
Arriving home , she and Christian discover Leila has vandalized Ana 's car .
Christian later tells Ana that his birth mother was a crack - addicted prostitute .
When Ana tells Jack she wo n't be attending the expo with him , he attempts to seduce her while they are alone at work , but she evades him and escapes .
Christian exerts his influence to have Jack fired , and Ana is promoted to acting editor in Jack 's place .
Christian asks Ana to move in with him and she agrees .
At Ana 's apartment , Leila threatens her with a gun .
Christian and his driver / bodyguard , Jason Taylor , enter and Christian controls Leila by becoming her dominant .
Ana , seeing Christian 's need to be dominant , leaves , returning hours later .
Christian is furious but Ana needs time to consider their relationship .
Christian submissively drops to his knees and confesses that he is not a dominant , but a sadist who enjoys hurting women who looked like his birth mother .
He insists he wants to change .
Christian later proposes but Ana needs time before accepting .
Christian leaves on a business trip , piloting his own helicopter .
An engine failure occurs over Mt. St. Helens , forcing him to ditch the craft in a heavily forested area .
A massive search and rescue ensues .
As Ana frightfully awaits news , Christian arrives home safely .
Ana , realizing she loves him , accepts his marriage proposal .
At Christian 's birthday party , Elena accuses Ana of being a gold digger .
Ana orders her to stop interfering .
Christian overhears and dismissively tells Elena that she taught him " how to fuck " while Ana taught him " how to love " .
Grace overhears the conversation and demands Elena leave for good ; Christian also cuts all ties with Elena .
Later that evening , Christian proposes to Ana , this time with a ring , and she accepts .
As fireworks erupt in the sky , Jack Hyde watches the festivities from afar , silently swearing revenge against Christian and Ana .
CAST
* Dakota Johnson as Anastasia " Ana " Steele * Jamie Dornan as Christian Grey
* Eric Johnson as Jack Hyde , Ana 's boss at SIP and stalker .
* Eloise Mumford as Katherine " Kate " Kavanagh , Anastasia 's best friend and roommate , who is in a relationship with Christian 's older brother , Elliot Grey .
* Bella Heathcote as Leila Williams , one of Christian 's former submissives .
* Rita Ora as Mia Grey , Christian 's adoptive younger sister .
* Luke Grimes as Elliot Grey , Christian 's adoptive older brother .
* Victor Rasuk as José Rodriguez , one of Anastasia 's friends .
* Kim Basinger as Elena Lincoln , Christian 's business partner and former lover .
* Marcia Gay Harden as Grace Trevelyan - Grey , Christian 's adoptive mother .
* Max Martini as Jason Taylor , Christian 's bodyguard and head of security .
* Bruce Altman as Jerry Roach , president of SIP .
* Robinne Lee as Ros Bailey
* Fay Masterson as Gail Jones * Andrew Airlie as Carrick Grey , Christian 's adoptive father .
*
Amy Price - Francis as Liz Morgan , head of personnel at SIP .
* Jennifer Ehle as Carla Wilks , Anastasia 's mother ( Unrated Edition ) .
* Dylan Neal as Bob , Anastasia 's stepfather ( Unrated Edition ) .
* Ashleigh LaThrop as Hanna , Anastasia 's co - worker and friend .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Universal Pictures and Focus Features secured the rights to the trilogy in March 2012 , and Universal is the film 's distributor .
The first book of the series was adapted into a film by the same name , and released on February 13 , 2015 .
The adaptation was produced by Focus , Michael De Luca Productions , and Trigger Street Productions .
In March 2014 , a producer of the first film , Dana Brunetti , had said there were , as of then , no solid plans to make a sequel .
Before the first film opened , there was high anticipation from fans for the sequel .
When the first film premiered at a special fan screening in New York City on February 6 , director Sam Taylor - Johnson announced that the book sequels Fifty Shades Darker and Fifty Shades Freed would also be adapted , with the first to be released in 2016 .
Right after the announcement , the director told Digital Spy that " it 's not my decision , and I have n't been privy to any of the discussions . "
On March 25 , 2015 , Taylor - Johnson officially left the franchise .
On April 2 , 2015 , Deadline confirmed that De Luca had left Sony Pictures to return to Universal to produce the Fifty Shades sequels .
On April 22 , 2015 , it was announced that E. L. James ' husband , Niall Leonard , would write the script for the sequel .
In April 2015 , Universal Pictures chair Donna Langley told The Hollywood Reporter that the second installment would be " more of a thriller . "
In July 2015 , it was confirmed that singer Rita Ora would reprise her role , Mia Grey , in the sequel .
On August 20 , 2015 , it was revealed by Deadline that James Foley was the front - runner to direct the sequel and third film Fifty Shades Freed , while the studio was also eyeing other directors , including Rebecca Thomas , Mark Pellington , and Tanya Wexler , and talks with Foley had not yet begun .
On November 12 , 2015 , TheWrap confirmed that Foley would direct both sequels , which would be shot back - to - back in 2016 , with Michael De Luca and Brunetti returning to produce , along with E. L. James .
Dakota Johnson and Jamie Dornan were confirmed to return for the sequels .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
On January 28 , 2016 , Kim Basinger joined the film , to play Elena Lincoln , Grey 's business partner and former dominant , while Luke Grimes , Eloise Mumford and Max Martini were set to reprise their characters from the first film .
On February 5 , Bella Heathcote was cast as Leila , one of Grey 's former submissives .
In the same month , Eric Johnson was cast to play Jack Hyde .
On February 18 , Robinne Lee and Fay Masterson joined the film 's cast .
On February 26 , Tyler Hoechlin was cast to play Boyce Fox , and on April 7 , it was reported that Hugh Dancy had joined to play Dr. John Flynn , Grey 's psychiatrist ; neither actor appeared in the finished film .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography was initially set to begin in Vancouver in June 2015 .
However , it was later postponed due to delays in the script .
It was later reported that filming would begin in February 2016 in Vancouver , while the studio North Shore Studios was booked for the film .
In November 2015 , Universal Studios announced that the film and Freed would be shot back - to - back , with principal photography scheduled to commence in early 2016 .
Filming took place in Paris and Vancouver from February 9 , 2016 to July 12 , 2016 , under the working title , " Further Adventures of Max and Banks 2 & 3 .
"
Principal photography concluded on April 11 , 2016 .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Fifty Shades Darker was released on February 10 , 2017 , by Universal Pictures .
The Digital HD was released on Amazon and iTunes on April 25 , 2017 while the DVD / Blu - ray debuted on May 9 , 2017 and took the number one spot in sales .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
On September 15 , 2016 , Universal released the film 's first official trailer , which amassed an unprecedented 114 million views in its first 24 hours , from various digital platforms such as Facebook , YouTube and Instagram .
It received more than 2.5 million views on the film 's official Facebook page .
Over 39.4 million views came from North America , while 74.6 million views came from over 32 international markets , including the U.K. , Mexico and France .
This broke the previous record , held by , when it received 112 million views in the same amount of time in October 2015 .
The record was later surpassed by the second trailer for Disney 's Beauty and the Beast , with 127.6 million views in November 2016 .
RATING Section::::Rating .
On November 10 , 2016 the sequel was given an R rating by the MPAA for " strong erotic sexual content , some graphic nudity and language . "
In Canada , the film was classified under 18A for its sexual content in all provinces except Quebec .
In Quebec , which has a different rating system , it was classified under 16 + for its " eroticism " .
In the United Kingdom , the film was given an 18 certificate for " strong sex " .
In the Philippines , the film received an R-18 rating from the Movie and Television Review and Classification Board ( MTRCB ) , which means that only moviegoers aged 18 years and above can watch the film , due to its strong sexual content .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The film 's soundtrack was released in two separate versions ; one for the 19 popular artists ' songs used in the film , and another separate release for the original score composed for the film by Danny Elfman .
Two of Elfman 's themes were also included on the popular artists ' version of the soundtrack release .
The film 's theme song , " I Do n't Wanna Live Forever " by Zayn and Taylor Swift was released on December 9 , 2016 .
The following month , on January 13 , 2017 , Halsey released the soundtrack 's next single , "
Not Afraid Anymore " .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Fifty Shades Darker grossed $ 114.5 million in the United States and Canada and $ 266.5 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 381.1 million , against a production budget of $ 55 million .
In the United States and Canada , Fifty Shades Darker opened alongside two other sequels , The Lego Batman Movie and , and was projected to gross $ 32–40 million in its opening weekend .
It earned $ 5.72 million from Thursday night previews at 3,120 theaters , down from the $ 8.6 million grossed by its predecessor two years prior , but still the sixth - best Thursday preview gross for an R - rated film .
The film made $ 21.5 million on Friday , down 30 % from the first film 's $ 30 million opening day , but topped the box office that day .
It went on to debut to $ 46.6 million , down 45 % from the first film 's $ 85.1 million , and finished second at the box office behind The Lego Batman Movie ( $ 53.0 million ) .
The film grossed $ 11 million on Valentine 's Day , marking the second - highest amount for when the holiday fell on a weekday , behind The Vow ( $ 11.6 million in 2012 ) , and bringing its five - day gross to $ 61.5 million .
In its second weekend , the film grossed $ 20.3 million , again finishing second at the box office behind The Lego Batman Movie .
This marked a 56.5 % drop from its first weekend gross , and was only $ 2 million behind the amount the first film grossed in its second weekend ( $ 22.3 million ) , only that marked a drop of 73.9 % from its respective debut .
In its third weekend , it grossed $ 7.7 million , dropping to 5th at the box office .
Outside North America , the film was simultaneously released in 57 countries , and was expected to gross $ 115–155 million over its first three days .
It ended up grossing $ 97.8 million in its opening weekend , the fourth largest R - rated international opening of all - time .
Its top grossing locations included Germany ( $ 11 million ) , the United Kingdom ( $ 9.7 million ) , France ( $ 8.7 million ) , Brazil ( $ 7.5 million ) , Italy ( $ 6.8 million ) , and Russia ( $ 6.7 million ) .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Much like its predecessor , Fifty Shades Darker received negative reviews from critics , who criticized its screenplay , narrative and Dornan 's performance .
On review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 10 % based on 176 reviews , with an average rating of 3.3/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Lacking enough chemistry heat or narrative friction to satisfy , the limp Fifty Shades Darker wants to be kinky but only serves as its own form of punishment . "
On Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating to reviews , the film has a score of 33 out of 100 , based on 39 critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B+ " on an A+ to F scale , an improvement over the " C+ " earned by its predecessor , while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave it an 82 % overall positive score and a 68 % " definite recommend " .
Richard Roeper gave the film two out of four stars , saying : " This is one good - looking , occasionally titillating , mostly soapy and dull snooze - fest . "
Vince Mancini of Uproxx acknowledged the film 's flaws , but said watching the film was enjoyable , noting , " Narrative sloppiness aside , as an outsider , sitting through Fifty Shades Darker was a reasonably diverting experience , odd , dumb fun made even more fun by an audience that whooped and shouted at the screen during sex scenes .
I did n't really get it , but I enjoyed the feeling of them having fun , though at two hours plus , it 's a bit of a slog . "
Manohla Dargis writing for The New York Times expressed similar ambiguous opinions regarding the content of the film , stating : I was still rooting for Ms. Johnson in Fifty Shades Darker , even if it proved tough going .
Once again , the story involves the on - and - off , tie - her - up , tie - her - down romance between Anastasia Steele ( Ms. Johnson ) and her billionaire boyfriend , Christian Grey ( Jamie Dornan ) , a guy with sculptured muscles , expensive playthings and dreary issues .
Stuff and kink happens : A gun is fired , a would - be rapist is punished and Anastasia is bound hand and foot .
Mostly , she advances and retreats ( repeat ) , mewls and moans , and registers surprise each time
Christian tries to dominate her outside the bedroom , evincing the kind of stalkerlike behavior that usually leads to restraining orders .
Richard Brody of The New Yorker described the film as inferior to the first , and found fault in the change in directors , stating :
Some of the greatest Hollywood melodramas ( such as Douglas Sirk 's Magnificent Obsession ) featured plotlines of an even more extravagant absurdity than that of Fifty Shades Darker .
Their extreme artifice became a framework for extreme ideas and extreme emotions , even in an era of extreme public reticence about what goes on in the bedroom .
The freedom of the current age of sexual explicitness invites realms of characterization — and of intimate imagination — that the first film in the Fifty Shades series hints at and the second one utterly ignores .
Fifty Shades Darkers indifference to its characters ' identities , conflicts , and desires is matched by its indifference to its own cinematic substance .
The film 's bland impersonality is grotesque ; its element of pornography is n't in its depiction of sex but in its depiction of people , of relationships , of situations that , for all their unusualness , bear a strong psychological and societal resonance .
There 's nothing wrong with Fifty Shades Darker that a good director could n't fix .
ACCOLADES Golden Raspberry Awards
SEQUEL Section::::Sequel .
The final installment of the trilogy was filmed back - to - back with Fifty Shades Darker and was released on February 9 , 2018 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS