JULIO CÉSAR CHÁVEZ VS .
OSCAR DE
LA
HOYA Julio César Chávez vs. Oscar De La Hoya , billed as " Ultimate Glory " , was a professional boxing match contested on June 7 , 1996 for the WBC and lineal super lightweight championship .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
After both Julio César Chávez and Oscar De La Hoya defeated their opponents ( Scott Walker and Darryl Tyson respectively ) in tune - up bouts on February 9 , 1996 , the two fighters agreed to face one another in a " dream match " set for June of that year .
The undefeated De La Hoya had already won world titles in two divisions and was looking to capture a third world title in a third weight class at only 23–years old .
The 33–year old Chavez , meanwhile , was entering his 100th fight and still possessed one of the most impressive records in boxing history , having gone 97–1–1 and capturing four world titles in three divisions in his 16–year career .
The bout was highly anticipated , with some even calling the biggest fight in Latino boxing history and both fighters taking home a then – career high $ 9 million purse .
Despite his vast experience advantage over De La Hoya ( who had only partaken in 21 pro fights up to that point ) and his status as champion , the aging Chavez was initially installed as a 3–1 underdog before odds were dropped to 2–1 by the time of the fight .
Though both fighters were of Mexican heritage , most Mexican and Mexican – American fans favored Chavez as De La Hoya had been born in the United States .
In promotional stops for their fight , De La Hoya was largely booed by the largely Hispanic populations of Phoenix , San Diego and even his native Los Angeles .
A controversial decision was made prior to the fight as De La Hoya 's promoter Bob Arum refused to let the fight be carried on Pay - per - view and instead opted for it to be shown almost exclusively on closed - circuit television , severely limiting the highly anticipated bouts audience .
Arum claimed that he made the decision to combat the use of illegal " black boxes " , which steal pay - per - view signals and allow its users to watch the program for free .
Though Arum claimed that the fight would net somewhere between $ 60 to $ 90 million even without pay - per - view , the fight drew a somewhat disappointing crowd of 750,000 , down from the 1.7 million fans Arum had expected , and fell well short of his expected earnings , with the fight grossing around $ 14 million .
THE FIGHT Section::::The fight .
The fight lasted less than four rounds .
Only one minute into round one , De La Hoya connected with a straight right hand that opened up a huge gash around Chavez ' eye .
The fight was temporally halted not even a minute later as the cut had become severe enough for the referee Joe Cortez to stop the action and allow Chavez to find a towel .
Though Chavez was able to continue , he was unable to get any momentum and was dominated by De La Hoya for the remainder of the fight .
In round four , as Chavez was finally mounting some offense , De La Hoya took control of the latter stages of the round and brutalized Chavez with a series of hard combinations and broke Chavez ' nose with a left hook .
As the cut around his eye had deteriorated even further , Cortez halted the fight once again and sent him to ringside physician Flip Homansky .
Homansky then informed Cortez that Chavez could not continue due to the multiple lacerations to his face and De La Hoya was awarded with the TKO victory at 2:37 of the fourth round REFERENCES