MARTIN ASHFORD ( HOME AND AWAY )
Martin " Ash " Ashford is a fictional character from the Australian soap opera Home and Away , played by George Mason .
The character made his first screen appearance on 27 October 2014 .
When Mason auditioned he believed Ash to be a " great character " and moved from Melbourne to accept the role .
Ash is characterised as a tough , ex - prisoner who has a backstory of criminal activity .
He was sent to prison after committing a robbery with Dean Sanderson ( Kevin Kiernan - Molloy ) , but he framed Ash as the sole perpetrator and turned his sister Billie ( Tessa de Josselin ) against him .
Ash is introduced into the show as an old prison friend of established character Darryl Braxton ( Steve Peacocke ) and they soon embark on a journey into the Australian Outback in search of Billie .
His storyline continued to be centric to Brax 's story .
The show later developed a relationship storyline with Denny Miller ( Jessica Grace Smith ) .
Critics have stated that the character quickly assumed the role of the show 's " hunk " and " bad boy " .
Mason decided to leave Home and Away in early 2018 .
His character took a temporary break in April , ahead of his departure on 20 June 2018 .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
New Zealand born George Mason had been residing in Melbourne when he secured an audition for the role .
He recalled thinking that Ash was a " great character " .
He was about to sign a long - term lease on a property in the city when he discovered he had been awarded the role .
Mason 's casting was announced on 30 July 2014 , after he was spotted filming with the cast and crew at Palm Beach in Sydney .
A Woman 's Day reporter commented that Mason would " bring an explosive plot line " to the show .
Ash comes to Summer Bay looking for Darryl Braxton ( Steve Peacocke ) .
Mason 's agent later confirmed that he would be playing Martin Ashford who goes by the nickname " Ash " .
The character was introduced on - screen during the episode broadcast on 27 October 2014 .
DEVELOPMENT CHARACTERISATION Section::::Development .
Section::::Characterisation .
Ash is portrayed as a tough male character that has had to survive prison .
Despite this he has a comical side to his personality and behaves in a hyperactive manner .
Ash is " haunted " because his sister wrongly believes he tried to blame her boyfriend for a joint crime .
But he is the type of person who would " never dodge responsibility at the expense of another " .
Mason described his character as being " chilled " and said " He plays up like a second - hand lawnmower
but it 's all in good fun .
I do n't think he takes life too seriously
but when it comes to family he definitely wants somewhere to belong . "
He added that Ash had a good heart , but his upbringing meant that he was a bit of a bad guy .
Mason told a TV Week reporter that Ash behaves like a " mystery man " .
In reference to female attention
Ash receives , he added that " it 's certainly interesting when he hits the beach " .
Ash is also described as " a pretty raw sort of bloke " .
He added that he wants fun while in Summer Bay to catch up the time he lost while in prison .
The actor believed that certain aspects of Ash could annoy viewers but predicted that he would become be a liked character .
INTRODUCTION Section::::Introduction .
Ash arrives in Summer Bay to stay with his friend Brax who he had meant while in prison .
Mason told Kerry Harvey writing for TV Guide that " he will definitely ruffle a few feathers when he comes into the Bay .
He 's a tough sort of a bloke with a few unresolved issues .
He 's come to the Bay looking for Brax so it will be interesting to see what happens there , whether it 's good or bad . "
Mason added that most of Ash 's scenes are shared with Brax .
He revealed an on - set " bromance " had formed with Peacocke , who acted as a mentor for Mason .
When Brax becomes aggressive with his brother Kyle Braxton ( Nic Westaway ) because of his bad experiences in prison ; the Braxton family question whether Ash should be around Brax .
Westaway told a TV Week reporter that " everyone is trying to figure out whether having Ash there is going to help Brax work out his problems , or whether Ash will be a constant reminder of what was one of the most painful times in his life . "
Ash 's first storyline sees him heading into the Australian Outback with Brax in search of his sister Billie ( Tessa de Josselin ) and her violent boyfriend Dean Sanderson ( Kevin Kiernan - Molloy ) .
Mason told Sarah Ellis ( Inside Soap ) that " Billie is the only family Ash has left , and he feels they need to make amends
now he 's out of jail .
" They travel to Broken Hill in search of her only to find she has moved on .
The duo meet Sam Kennedy ( Wade Briggs ) who tells them where Dean lives .
Mason explained that Dean does not know where Billie is and Ash decides to get drunk to forget about it .
Brax then follows Dean to an abandoned mine where he retrieves the money that Dean and Ash stole before the latter went to prison for the crime .
Brax is vague about his encounter and refuses to fully explain how he got the money from Dean .
Mason added that " the trip will be life - changing for Ash , without Billie in his life he will struggle to find a new direction . "
For the actor , filming in the outback was a welcome change because he felt like he was " shooting an action movie " .
Dean is found dead and Brax is accused of his murder .
Ash recalls his time in the outback and realises that Sam must be the actual culprit .
Ash warns local police constable Katarina Chapman ( Pia Miller ) about his suspicions .
Miller told TV Week 's Stephen Downie that her character will not listen to anything Ash has to say about Sam .
Ash and Brax decide to travel back to the outback to confront him directly .
But they have to outsmart Katarina who is convinced that Brax plans to leave Summer Bay .
Mason told Downie that Ash could have gone alone but Brax wants to confront Dean himself .
He added that Ash feels obliged to help Brax because Dean 's murder would not have implicated Brax had they not been searching for Billie .
Mason later told an Inside Soap reporter that there is no plan but they do find Sam and have their suspicions confirmed .
But Sam refuses to change his police statement .
Brax 's impending legal issues make Ash feel guilty .
Mason explained " Brax is like family , and Ash feels responsible for him being in this situation in the first place .
Ash would n't be able to live with himself knowing an innocent man went to jail because of him . "
He added that Ash would be forever indebted to Brax and his girlfriend Ricky Sharpe ( Bonnie Sveen ) .
Sveen added that with the evidence incriminating Brax , his lawyer advises him to accuse Ash of murdering Dean .
But Brax 's strong loyalty to Ash means betraying him is not an option .
The storyline continues to develop animosity between Ash and Ricky .
Sveen told Erin Miller ( TV Week ) that Ricky is " deeply wary " of Ash 's continued presence .
She does not trust him because he has got Brax into trouble .
DENNY MILLER Section::::Denny Miller .
Ash becomes acquainted with Denny Miller ( Jessica Grace Smith ) and they flirt .
Sophie Dainty of Digital Spy stated that " sparks fly " when they meet , adding that " the chemistry between the two is obvious . "
But their encounters occur not long after Denny 's ex - boyfriend Casey Braxton ( Lincoln Younes ) had died .
The show 's producer Lucy Addario told TV Week 's Downie that they had planned a romance storyline for Ash , " but in typical Summer Bay style , it wo n't be easy and things will get in the way . "
Denny later acknowledges her attraction to Ash and John Palmer
( Shane Withington ) encourages her to move on .
Smith told Downie that " Denny was confused about her feelings for Ash .
She had a lot of guilt about moving on from Casey .
" Denny decides to arrange a meeting with Ash and surprises Ash with a kiss .
Smith added that " Ash is really into it , but suddenly he runs away . "
Smith later explained to an Inside Soap journalist that Denny is left confused by Ash 's reaction .
She added that Ash is Denny 's type of love interest because she has never been attracted to the " typical clean - cut guy " .
Denny realises that Ash is being loyal to Brax , who in turn was looking out her best interests .
She decides to must convince Ash to begin a relationship and he later agrees .
They continue to date and Denny believes she has finished grieving for Casey .
The pair decide to consummate their relationship but after Denny feel " odd " .
Mason told Downie ( TV Week ) that Ash is understanding of her situation and " he knows he 's walking on shaky ground with her . "
DEPARTURE Section::::Departure .
In April 2018 , Mason confirmed that he was leaving Home and Away and had already filmed his final scenes .
Mason commented that the role had been " a dream job " , but it was also " overwhelming " playing a main character on the show .
The show aired a temporary exit for Ash on 26 April 2018 .
His final appearance occurred during the episode broadcast on 20 June .
STORYLINES
Section::::Storylines .
Ash goes to Angelo 's to find Darryl Braxton , causing his girlfriend , Ricky to be wary of him .
Ash later gets on the wrong side of Andy Barrett ( Tai Hara ) .
Brax reveals that Ash is his former cell mate , who helped him out while he was in prison .
Brax gives Ash a job at his restaurant and lets him sleep on the couch .
When Brax loses his temper with his brother , Ash realises that he is not coping and urges him to open up to his family about his time inside .
Ash and Ricky join forces to help Brax .
Ash announces that he wants to find
his sister , Billie , and Brax joins him on a road trip to find her boyfriend Dean , who let Ash take the blame for an armed robbery they committed .
They locate Dean and Brax manages to get Ash 's share of the robbery money back .
Ash gives the money to Phoebe Nicholson ( Isabella Giovinazzo ) .
He meets Denny and flirts with her , causing Brax to warn him off as she was dating his younger brother Casey before his death .
But he ignores Brax 's advice and helps Denny fix her car and they bond .
Ash sees that Denny is wearing her old engagement ring from Casey .
Ash congratulates her assuming that she has a new fiancé .
Ash and Andy Barrett ( Tai Hara ) travel to the city to accompany Phoebe at her concert .
The duo are fooled and locked in a cellar by Neive Devlin ( Jolene Anderson ) who drugs Phoebe to create a career boosting scandal .
Ash and Andy manage to escape and save Phoebe from her ordeal .
Ash is shocked when Brax is arrested for murdering
Dean and Ricky hits him believing he is to blame .
Ash realises that Sam must have committed the crime but fails to convince Katarina .
Ash and Brax head to the outback to confront Sam
but he refuses to confess .
When Brax faces his court hearing Sam exposes that they took stolen money from Dean 's hiding place .
When the money is found in Angelos , Ash is implicated in Dean 's murder and arrested alongside Brax , but the latter takes the blame .
Ash pledges to look after Ricky following Brax 's imprisonment
but she blames him and tells him to keep away .
Ash decides to begin a relationship with Denny which annoys Ricky who believes he is betraying Brax .
Brax is attacked in prison by Trevor Gunson ( Diarmid Heidenreich ) because he witnessed Ash visiting .
Ash tells Ricky that Gunno wants revenge on him because he exposed his drug dealing .
He visits Gunno who orders Ash to help him deal or he will kill Brax .
Ash came to visit his late brother , Luke 's grave and bumped into his sister , Billie Ashford ( Tessa de Josselin ) , they talked for a while
and Ash told Billie that Dean 's dead and that he did n't punch the security guard during a robbery .
Ash discovers that Kyle 's been sleeping with Billie behind Phoebe 's back after walking in on them .
Ash thought Kyle had seduced her and attacks him , until Billie explained everything .
Ash finds out that from Chris Harrington ( Johnny Ruffo ) that Dr Nate Cooper tried to allegedly rape Billie and he attacks Nate at the police station .
But Ash later uncovers out that Billie made up Nate 's sexual assault and is mad at her for causing trouble .
Billie tells Ash that she likes Nate , but he was dating Kat and since Dean died , she wants to move on , but Kyle and Nate both reject her .
Ash finds out that Billie has leg injuries and burns from a fire after she rescues Zac MacGuire , ( Charlie Clausen )
Matt Page ( Alec Snow ) and Oscar MacGuire ( Jake Speer ) from the fire , which lit their house and that Billie is the main suspect behind the fire .
Billie is to a hospital in the city .
Kyle takes Ash 's place during a drug deal .
Later after Brax manages to get himself transferred to another prison after he reports Gunno , Kyle and Ash come up with an escape plan so Brax and Ricky can have a life with baby Casey .
The plan goes haywire after Gunno sends someone to kill Brax .
The police car transferring Brax is run off the road and into a river .
Brax survives and convinces Ash to let everyone think that he is dead so his friends and family will be safe from Gunno .
Ash reluctantly agrees .
Denny eventually breaks up with Ash because of his lies and the dangerous choices he has makes .
Ash and Phoebe have a fling when she and Kyle temporarily break up .
Ash and Phoebe eventually start a relationship .
Ash discovered that Phoebe is pregnant and he assumes he 's the father .
But Ash found out that Kyle 's the father , causing a strain in his relationship with Phoebe and he breaks up with her .
But they got back together
and Ash tells Phoebe that he 'll support the baby and will love the baby like his own .
However , Phoebe discovered she 's pregnant with twins , and suffered a miscarriage .
Billie returns to Summer Bay and reunite with Ash , after she rescues Oscar .
Billie was a main suspect when police discover Kat 's missing handcuffs are in Billie 's bag and Ash suspects that Zac 's ex , Charlotte King ( Erika Heynatz ) is behind this .
He comes to her house and attacks her , almost strangling her to death , until Kat stops him .
Ash attends Zac and Leah Patterson - Baker 's wedding .
Ash became a suspect to Charlotte 's murder and Kat 's abusive ex - fiancé , Detective Dylan Carter ( Jeremy Lindsay Taylor ) suspects that Ash killed Charlotte and arrests him for murder , but the police have no evidence to prove him guilty .
During Billie 's trial , Ash is shocked when Zac and Charlotte 's son , Hunter King ( Scott Lee ) confesses that he started the fire at Leah 's house .
Ash notices that Kat hass been seeing Dylan and warns her that Dylan is a bad influence , but she does n't listen to him or to Phoebe .
Ash and Phoebe break up when she finds out Ash was heavily drunk at a bar and finds a barmaid from the bar in his house the next day and assumes he is cheating on Phoebe and tells her the truth .
The barmaid returns to collect her jewellery and Ash told her that he and Phoebe breaks up because he cheated on her .
But the barmaid says that they have not slept together
and she slept on the couch during the night he was drunk .
Ash tells Phoebe the truth but Phoebe tells him that they ca n't be together anymore
and they end things for good .
Ash quickly moves on from Phoebe and starts to like Kat .
Ash is held hostage by Dylan in his house , along Kat and Billie too .
But Dylan is arrested .
Kat and Ash soon fall in love and start a relationship , which makes Phoebe jealous .
Ash finds out that Billie is pregnant with Leah 's son VJ Patterson ( Matt Little ) .
Ash was happy when Billie and VJ are engaged and Ash accepts VJ .
On Billie and VJ 's wedding , Billie runs off .
Ash finds out that VJ is n't the father of Billie 's baby and that Irene Roberts ' long lost son , Mick Jennings ( Kristian Schmid ) is the father , who raped Billie at the gym .
In 2017 , Ash meets his newborn niece , Luc Patterson .
Ash discovers that Billie has lung cancer and has only a few moments to live .
Ash is hurt and devastated when VJ tells him that Billie died on the beach in his arms , Ash breaks down and Justin Morgan ( James Stewart ) calms him down .
When VJ discovers that John Palmer ( Shane Withington ) , is the arsonist behind the recent fires , he informs Ash who then heads to the hospital and openly blames John for Billie 's death , lashing out at John and leading to the hospital 's staff throwing Ash out .
When Ash tries to assist Leah in helping to care for Luc , she constantly pushes him away and lectures him on how to care for Luc .
Ash loses control and says that Leah is not Luc 's real family .
He then apologises and settles his differences with Leah , Irene and VJ .
After he receives Billie 's death certificate in the mail , Ash breaks down and Kat comforts him , leading to them having sex soon afterwards .
Ash tries to make it so that his niece will receive her late mother 's money but must prove his brother Luke is dead first .
Kat calls Births , Deaths and Marriages so that they can get Luke 's death certificate , but there is n't one .
An unknown caller then calls Ash and the caller turns out to be a man named " Patrick Stanwood " .
Ash is shocked as Stanwood sounds exactly like his late brother and he and Kat agree to investigate further .
Kat has Stanwood 's number traced by one of her colleagues and they head to Stanwood 's address .
After getting no answer from the door , Ash goes around the back and kicks the door in .
Kat protests that they are breaking and entering , but Ash continues searching the house , to no avail .
Just as they are about to leave Stanwood 's house , a man appears out of the bushes and is revealed to be Luke .
Ash then punches him in the face and he and Kat leave the area and go back to The Farmhouse .
Ash wins custody over Luc and she moves in with Ash and Kat .
Ash starts to become close to Tori Morgan ( Penny McNamee ) , which annoys Kat .
But Ash becomes more annoyed when Kat becomes close to newcomer Robbo ( Jake Ryan ) .
Kat and Ash break up and Ash is annoyed when Kat quickly moves on and starts a relationship with Robbo .
Ash accidentally sees Tori naked when he visits her house , while she is having a shower .
Ash tells Hunter , who everyone , which upsets Tori .
Ash confess to Justin that he has feelings for Tori , but Tori , who is unaware of Ash 's feelings towards her tells him that she wants to be mates .
Ash is annoyed when Tori went on a blind date with Colin and Ash interrupts the date , upsetting Tori .
The next day , Ash confess his feelings to Tori and Tori believes Ash is using her as a rebound , after his break up with Kat .
Leah and Justin tell Tori that Ash really likes her , and does n't want to get back with Kat anymore .
Ash later meets Liz after Luc 's pram bumps into her baby , Phoenix 's pram , which breaks the wheel .
After Ash fixes it , Liz asks him out for a drink , and he accepts .
They share a drink at Salt , with their babies but sees Tori there with Colin and becomes distracted when he keeps looking at Tori .
Liz realises that Ash likes Tori and leaves with Colin .
Tori leaves and Ash runs off , with Justin babysitting Luc .
Ash confesses to Tori that he really likes her and kisses her , but she runs off after she kisses him back .
The next day , Tori told Ash that she likes him and wants to be with him , and they kiss , starting a relationship .
Ash and Tori go on their first date and they talk about taking their relationship further .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Mason won two awards at the 2015 TV Week and Soap Extra # OMGAwards for Best Shock Kiss between his character Ash and Phoebe , and Best Love Triangle between Ash , Phoebe and Kyle Braxton ( Nic Westaway ) .
In August 2017 , Mason was longlisted for Best Daytime Star at the Inside Soap Awards .
The nomination did not progress to the viewer - voted shortlist .
TV Guides Harvey said Mason attracted international media interest even before he debuted on - screen .
She added that Australian magazines were quick to brand him "
Home
And Away 's newest hunk " .
A
What 's on TV reporter branded Ash a " handsome stranger " .
Bianca La Cioppa from TV Week did not approve of Ash 's flirtation with Denny because it was too soon after Casey 's death .
But added " trust me , I get it .
Ash is easy on the eye .
Having him flirt with you would be mighty hard to resist . "
Her colleague Stephen Downie disagreed believing that Denny should be with " handsome Ash " .
A writer from TV Magazine said that the chemistry between " hot newcomer Ash " and Denny was undeniable .
A writer from New Idea branded Mason a " cute newcomer " and named his on - screen coutnerpart a " tough and resilient " character .
TV Week 's Sharon Goldstein Hunt branded Ash " the Bay 's newest bad boy and Brax 's bestie " .
While their colleague bemoaned Ash 's lack of development writing " just who is Ash ?
By the end of last year 's finale Brax 's old prison buddy still seemed a bit of a mystery . "
Sarah Ellis of Inside Soap opined that Ash is " obviously no angel " and " there 's not really much hope of him ever going straight " because of his connections to the Braxton family .
But she did believe the character has heart because of his caring nature towards Billie and Brax .
Ellis later observed , " Those luscious locks of his are obviously a magnet for the ladies of Summer Bay ! "
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Martin Ashford at the Official Home and Away website