THE BOOK OF HENRY
The Book of Henry is a 2017 American drama film directed by Colin Trevorrow and written by Gregg Hurwitz .
The film stars Naomi Watts , Jaeden Lieberher , Jacob Tremblay , Sarah Silverman , Lee Pace , Maddie Ziegler , and Dean Norris .
The story concerns a plan hatched by a young genius to save the girl next door from abuse .
The film premiered at the Los Angeles Film Festival on June 14 , 2017 .
It was released in theaters by Focus Features on June 16 , 2017 , and received generally negative reviews from critics , mostly focused on the film 's plot twists and tonal shifts , and Trevorrow 's direction , although the cast received some praise .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In a small suburban town in the Hudson Valley , 11-year - old boy genius Henry Carpenter and his younger brother Peter are being raised by their single mother Susan , a waitress who is working on writing children 's picture books .
Henry has used his intellect to invest successfully in the stock market , building up a very substantial nest egg for his family .
Henry also protects Peter from a school bully and builds Rube Goldberg machines in their tree house .
Henry and Susan are both fond of their next - door neighbor ( and Henry 's classmate ) , Christina Sickleman , who has recently become glum .
Henry sees Christina being abused by her stepfather , Glenn , the local police commissioner .
Henry reports the abuse to social services and the school principal , Janice Wilder , but Glenn has connections throughout the local government , and Wilder is reluctant to challenge the commissioner without " conclusive evidence " .
Henry is unable to get the authorities to launch a serious investigation that would protect Christina .
Henry tells his mother that when someone is in trouble , those who can help must take action .
He develops a detailed plan to rescue Christina that he memorializes in a notebook .
After a violent seizure , Henry is taken to the hospital , where he is diagnosed with a brain tumor and undergoes surgery .
Anticipating his death , he tells Peter to give Susan the notebook .
Days later , Henry dies in Susan 's arms in the hospital .
Susan is distraught at Henry 's death and has difficulty functioning , but when Peter gives her the notebook , she focuses on Henry 's plan .
Susan tries , but fails , to interest a nearby social services agency in opening an investigation .
One night , from the window in Peter 's bedroom , she sees Glenn in Christina 's room and decides to carry out the plan .
The notebook and an accompanying cassette tape describe Henry 's step - by - step plan to kill Glenn with a sniper rifle while covering Susan 's tracks so that it will be impossible to trace the murder back to her .
Susan 's alibi is to be provided by executing the murder while both Christina and Peter are performing at a school talent show .
Susan slips away from the talent show and puts the plan into motion .
As she is about to pull the trigger , however , she realizes that Henry 's plan , though ingenious , is the construct of a child , and that she must act as an adult .
She immediately confronts Glenn and tells him that she is going to expose him for what he has done to Christina .
Glenn replies that everyone will believe him , not her , and he tells her that he is going to call his police chief to come and bring her in .
At the same time , affected by Christina 's dance performance at the talent show , Principal Wilder decides to follow through on the abuse accusation and contacts the authorities .
Glenn returns home , calls his relative at Social Services , and learns that an investigation is being opened into his abuse of Christina .
As the police arrive at his house , Glenn kills himself .
Susan legally adopts Christina as her daughter .
She also finishes writing one of her children 's books , as Henry had urged her to do .
CAST * Naomi Watts as Susan Carpenter , the mother of Henry and Peter * Jaeden Lieberher as Henry Carpenter , the title character and Susan 's older son
* Jacob Tremblay as Peter Carpenter , Henry 's brother and Susan 's younger son
* Sarah Silverman as Sheila , a waitress and Susan 's best friend * Dean Norris as Glenn Sickleman , the police commissioner and Christina 's abusive stepfather * Lee Pace as David Daniels , a neurosurgeon who operates on Henry * Maddie Ziegler as Christina Sickleman , Glenn 's stepdaughter * Tonya Pinkins as Janice Wilder , the school principal * Bobby Moynihan as John , Susan 's and Sheila 's boss at the diner
* Geraldine Hughes as Mrs. Evans , Henry 's and Christina 's teacher * Jackson Nicoll as Morris , a boy who bullies
Peter PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Hurwitz wrote the first draft of the screenplay by 1998 .
The film was eventually optioned by Jenette Kahn , and Sidney Kimmel Entertainment joined as a producer .
An executive at Kimmel Entertainment thought that Colin Trevorrow would be right to direct The Book of Henry .
Trevorrow and Hurwitz found each other to be congenial , but then Trevorrow was hired to direct Jurassic World .
Another director was considered .
By early 2015 , after Trevorrow finished Jurassic World , he returned to The Book of Henry .
Kimmel Entertainment and Double Nickel Entertainment financed and co - produced the film ; producers are Sidney Kimmel , Kahn and Adam Richman .
Focus Features obtained worldwide distribution rights .
Principal photography on the film began in September 2015 in and around New York City , and concluded in November .
The music was composed by Michael Giacchino .
Stevie Nicks sang a new song in the film .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The Book of Henry was scheduled to be released on September 16 , 2016 , but Focus rescheduled the film 's release to June 16 , 2017 , concluding that during the summer , the film release schedule would offer fewer adult - oriented films that might compete against The Book of Henry for older viewers .
The film premiered at the Los Angeles Film Festival on June 14 , 2017 .
In its opening weekend , the film grossed $ 1.4 million from 579 theaters ( an average of $ 2,460 per theater ) , finishing 13th at the box office , and making it " by far the biggest start among the new Specialties " opening that weekend .
The film was featured at the July 2017 Ischia Film Festival , where Trevorrow was honored with the Breakout Director award for the film .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 22 % based on 125 reviews , with an average rating of 4.1/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " The Book of Henry deserves a few points for ambition , but its tonal juggling act – and a deeply maudlin twist – may leave viewers gaping in disbelief rather than choking back tears . "
On Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating , the film has a weighted average score of 31 out of 100 , based on 31 critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews " .
PostTrak reported audiences gave the film an 86 % overall positive score and a 65 % " definite recommend " .
Caroline McVitty commented in The Island Packet that the film was one " that critics hate and audiences love . "
Owen Gleiberman of Variety wrote : " There 's the kind of bad movie that just sits there , unfolding with grimly predictable monotony .
Then there 's the kind where the badness expands and metastasizes , taking on a jaw - dropping life of its own , pushing through to ever - higher levels of garishness .
The Book of Henry ... is of the latter , you've - got - to - see - it - to - disbelieve - it variety .
"
The Guardian 's Peter Bradshaw , in a critical review , said that , " in its pure misjudged ickiness , bad - acting ropiness , and its quirksy , smirksy passive - aggressive tweeness , this insidiously terrible film could hardly get any more skin - crawling . "
Writing for Vulture , Emily Yoshida opined , " It does not suffice to call The Book of Henry bad ; it 's nonfunctional , so poorly conceived from the ground up as to slip out of the grasp of the usual standards
one applies to narrative film .
It might be admirable if it was n't such torture to watch . "
Ignatiy Vishnevetsky of The A.V. Club wrote : " Director Colin Trevorrow ...
lacks any of the eccentricities that might make this quirky and contrived material work , even at face value , " though he added , " its above - average performances and insistence on following through on an off - beat premise give it a hint of battiness .
" Writing for Rolling Stone , Peter Travers gave it 1.5 stars out of 4 , saying : " The Book of Henry starts well , begins flirting with absurdity in the middle – and ends in crashing disaster .
But the feeling persists that director Colin Treverrow believes every word in the shambles of a 20-year - old screenplay by crime novelist Gregg Hurwitz . "
Stephen Schaefer of the Boston Herald was one of the minority of critics who praised the film , as was Colin Covert of the Chicago Tribune , who concluded : " This is a poignant , frequently funny film that moves into unexpected dark subjects . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Trailer No . 1 *
Feature on the young stars of the film in Vanity Fair