NOAH GALLOWAY Noah Matthew Galloway ( born October 28 , 1981 ) is a former United States Army soldier , motivational speaker , and extreme sports enthusiast .
He was injured during the Iraq War , losing his left arm above the elbow and left leg above the knee .
He was a contestant on Dancing with the Stars season 20 , paired with Sharna Burgess .
The pair finished in third place .
He led his team to victory in the first season of the American Grit TV show on FOX .
His book Living with No Excuses : The Remarkable Rebirth of an American Soldier was released in August 2016 .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Galloway was born in Birmingham , Alabama , the son of Andy Galloway and Bebe Galloway .
When Galloway was young , his father had an accident and lost his hand , but was able to work construction .
Galloway said that his father was able to give him advice when he was injured , and understood his depression and mistakes .
Galloway 's family 's background is Scottish .
He has competed in sports events wearing a tartan kilt .
Galloway said that his family has a history of serving in the military .
CAREER
MILITARY
Section::::Career .
Section::::Military .
Galloway joined the military in 2001 after 9/11 .
He was a Sergeant assigned to the 1st Battalion of the 502nd Infantry , 101st Airborne Division at Fort Campbell , Kentucky , during Operation Iraqi Freedom .
On December 19 , 2005 , during his second deployment , he was severely injured in an IED attack in Yusafiah , Iraq .
He lost his left arm above the elbow and his left leg above the knee ; his right leg and jaw were badly injured , the latter having to be wired shut .
He was unconscious for five days , and later was moved to Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington , D.C. for further treatment and rehabilitation .
FITNESS COMPETITIONS
Section::::Fitness competitions .
After leaving the Army , and going through an extended period of depression and addictions , first to pills , then to alcohol , with encouragement of his friend Eric Eisenberg who fits prosthetic devices at BioTech Limb & Brace , Galloway began focusing on fitness , reconnecting with his passion for sports that he had from his childhood and before his injury .
Galloway eventually became a personal trainer .
He participated in a variety of fitness competitions from regular 5 K and 10 K races to ones such as Tough Mudders , CrossFit competitions and Spartan events .
Galloway was part of Operation Enduring Warrior , a non - profit organization that helps veterans via sports .
Galloway was part of a team attempting to climb Carstensz Pyramid in Indonesia .
Galloway said that social media helped him stay inspired to participate in the competitions and events .
MOTIVATIONAL SPEAKER Section::::Motivational speaker .
He is also a motivational speaker , addressing audiences of veterans , school children , and others with his message of " no excuses " .
Galloway appeared on the November 2014 cover of Men 's Health magazine , the first reader to be selected for the magazine 's cover , and was named the publication 's " Ultimate Men 's Health Guy " .
He has been a guest on The Ellen DeGeneres Show and The Today Show .
In 2015 , Galloway was featured on the cover of U.S. Veterans Magazine Summer issue .
BRAND SPONSORSHIP Section::::Brand sponsorship .
In October 2014 , Galloway became the spokesman and model for Kenneth Cole 's new fragrance Mankind Ultimate .
More recently , Galloway became a brand ambassador for Armitron Watches .
Both he and Armitron champion the No Excuses Charitable Fund which empowers injured veterans through support of physical rehabilitative services .
DANCING WITH THE STARS Section::::Dancing with the Stars .
In 2015 , Galloway was chosen as a contestant on Dancing with the Stars ( season 20 ) , and was paired with professional dancer and choreographer Sharna Burgess .
While Galloway experimented with a prosthetic arm for his Argentine tango , he and Burgess decided not to use it , ultimately not using it in any of his dances .
The producers told him before the competition began that he would not be assigned the jive or quickstep , since the quick , repetitive motions required for those dances would be too painful .
On May 19 , 2015 , Galloway and Burgess finished the competition in third place losing to Riker Lynch and Rumer WillisCha - Cha - Cha/
" I Lived " 7 6 6 7
No Elimination 2 Samba/ " Homegrown Honey "
7 6 7 7
Safe 3
Argentine Tango/"Rather Be " 7 7 8 8
Safe 4 Contemporary/"American Soldier " 8 8 8 8
Safe 5 Foxtrot/"A Whole New World " 7 7 7 7
Safe 6
Safe 7 Safe 8 Tango/"Geronimo " Salsa/"Mr .
Put It Down " 8 8 7 8 8 8 88 Safe Viennese Waltz/"The Time of My Life
" Paso Doble/"Unstoppable " ( E.S. Posthumus ) 9 – 9 10 9 10 9 10
Safe Argentine Tango/"Rather Be " Freestyle/"Titanium " and " Fix You " Argentine Tango & Cha - Cha - Cha Fusion /
" Surrender TELEVISION APPEARANCES Section::::Television appearances .
+ List of television appearances and roles ! scope="col " Year ! scope="col " Title ! scope="col " Role ! scope="col " class="unsortable " Notes CHARITY WORK Section::::Charity work .
Galloway founded the No Excuses Charitable Fund .
The fund , which assists organizations he feels are important , has aided Operation Enduring Warrior and also local programs including those for children at the YMCA of the town where he lives , Alabaster , Alabama .
In June 2016 , Galloway accompanied high school students from Alabaster , Alabama 's Thompson High School on a mission to Jutiapa , Honduras , to help provide computer labs as well as installing water chlorinators for fresh water .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Galloway is a divorced father of three children .
His oldest son , Colston , is from his first marriage .
His son Jack and daughter Rian , are from his second marriage in 2007 .
That marriage also ended in divorce .
During the semi - finals of Dancing with the Stars , Galloway proposed to his girlfriend ( later fiancée ) , Jamie Boyd , on air .
On Monday , October 26 , 2015 , Galloway announced the end of the engagement .
In September 2015 , as part of the Homes for Our Troops program and a Specially Adapted Housing Grant from the Veterans Administration , Galloway was given a mortgage - free home that is adaptable to wheelchairs , which he sometimes needs , as well as other features needed for amputees .
The organization also provides veterans with financial planning assistance .
Galloway had volunteered for the organization as a builder volunteer starting in 2010 .
WORKS AND PUBLICATIONS
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* NoahGalloway.com