A STAR IS BORN ( 2018 FILM )
A Star Is Born is a 2018 American musical romantic drama film produced and directed by Bradley Cooper ( in his directorial debut ) and written by Eric Roth , Cooper and Will Fetters .
A remake of the 1937 film of the same name , it stars Cooper , Lady Gaga , Andrew Dice Clay , Dave Chappelle , and Sam Elliott , and follows a hard - drinking musician ( Cooper ) who discovers and falls in love with a young singer ( Gaga ) .
It marks the fourth remake of the original 1937 film , after the 1954 musical , the 1976 rock musical and the 2013 Bollywood romance film .
Talks of a remake of A Star Is Born began in 2011 , with Clint Eastwood attached to direct and Beyoncé set to star .
The film was in development hell for several years with various actors approached to co - star , including Christian Bale , Leonardo DiCaprio , Will Smith , and Tom Cruise .
In March 2016 , Cooper signed on to star and direct , and Lady Gaga joined the cast in August 2016 .
Principal photography began at the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival in April 2017 .
A Star Is Born premiered at the 75th Venice International Film Festival on August 31 , 2018 , and was theatrically released in the United States on October 5 , 2018 , by
Warner Bros. The film has grossed over $ 376 million worldwide and received critical acclaim , with praise for Cooper , Gaga and Elliott 's performances and Cooper 's direction , as well as the screenplay , cinematography and music .
It was chosen by both the National Board of Review and American Film Institute as one of the Top 10 Films of 2018 , and received five nominations at the 76th Golden Globe Awards , including Best Motion Picture – Drama .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Jackson Maine , a famous country music singer privately battling an alcohol and drug addiction , plays a concert in California .
His main support is Bobby , his manager and older half - brother .
After the show , Jackson visits a drag bar where he witnesses a performance by Ally , a waitress and singer - songwriter .
Jackson is amazed by her performance , and they spend the night speaking to each other , where Ally discloses to him the troubles she has faced in pursuing a professional music career .
Jackson invites Ally to his next show .
Despite her initial refusal she attends and , with Jackson 's encouragement , sings on stage with him .
Jackson invites Ally to go on tour with him , and they form a romantic relationship .
In Arizona , Ally and Jackson visit the ranch where Jackson grew up and where his father is buried , only to discover that Bobby sold the land .
Angered at his betrayal , Jackson punches Bobby , who subsequently quits as his manager .
Before doing so , Bobby reveals that he did inform Jackson about the sale , but the latter was too inebriated to notice .
While on tour Ally meets Rez , a record producer who offers her a contract .
Although visibly bothered , Jackson still supports her decision .
Rez refocuses Ally away from country music and towards pop .
Jackson misses one of Ally 's performances after he passes out drunk in public ; he recovers at the home of his friend Noodles , and later makes up with Ally .
There he proposes to Ally with an impromptu ring made from a loop of guitar string , and they are married that same day .
During Ally 's performance on Saturday Night Live , Bobby reconciles with Jackson .
Later , Jackson and Ally fight after he drunkenly voices his disapproval of Ally 's new image and music , which is nominated for three Grammy Awards .
At the Grammys , a visibly intoxicated Jackson performs in a tribute to Roy Orbison , and Ally wins the Best New Artist award .
When she goes up on stage to receive her award , Jackson follows her , where he wets himself and passes out .
Ally 's father Lorenzo berates Jackson and Ally helps him sober up .
Jackson joins a rehabilitation program shortly thereafter .
Jackson recovers in rehab for about two months , where he discloses to his counselor that he attempted suicide when he was 13 years old .
He also mentions that he has tinnitus , which has been getting worse .
He tearfully apologizes to Ally for his behavior , and returns home .
Ally wishes to bring Jackson to perform with her on the European leg of her tour ; Rez refuses , prompting Ally to cancel the remainder of the tour so she can care for Jackson .
Rez later confronts Jackson , accusing him of holding Ally back .
That evening , Ally lies to Jackson , and tells him that her record label has cancelled her tour so she can focus on her second album .
Jackson promises that he will come to her concert that night , but after Ally leaves , he hangs himself in their garage .
Ally becomes inconsolable after Jackson 's death .
She is visited by Bobby , who explains Jackson 's death was his own fault and not hers .
Ally takes a song that Jackson had written but never performed and sings it at a tribute concert , introducing herself as Ally Maine .
CAST * Bradley Cooper as Jackson Maine , an established singer - songwriter and alcoholic .
He is Ally 's mentor and love interest .
* Lady Gaga as Ally Maine , a nightclub singer - songwriter who is discovered by Jackson .
* Sam Elliott as Bobby Maine , Jackson 's older half - brother and manager .
* Dave Chappelle as George " Noodles " Stone , Jackson 's close friend , himself a retired musician .
* Andrew Dice Clay as Lorenzo Campana , Ally 's father .
* Anthony Ramos as Ramon , Ally 's friend .
* Michael Harney as Wolfie , a limo driver and friend of Lorenzo .
* Rafi Gavron as Rez Gavron , a music producer and Ally 's manager .
Section::::Cast .
Additionally , Rebecca Field appears as Gail , Shangela Laquifa Wadley as the drag bar emcee , Willam Belli as drag queen Emerald , Greg Grunberg as Jackson 's driver Phil , and Ron Rifkin as Carl .
Lukas Nelson & Promise of the Real appear as Jackson 's band , Eddie Griffin appears as a local preacher and Luenell appears as a cashier .
Marlon Williams , Brandi Carlile , Halsey , Alec Baldwin , and Don Roy King cameo as themselves .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
In January 2011 , it was announced that Clint Eastwood was in talks to direct Beyoncé in a third American remake of the 1937 film A Star Is Born ; however , the project was delayed due to Beyoncé 's pregnancy .
In April 2012 , writer Will Fetters told Collider that the script was inspired by Kurt Cobain .
Talks with Christian Bale , Leonardo DiCaprio , Tom Cruise , Johnny Depp , and Will Smith to play the male lead failed to come to fruition .
On October 9 , 2012 , Beyoncé left the project , and it was reported that Bradley Cooper was in talks to star .
Eastwood was interested in Esperanza Spalding to play the female lead .
On March 24 , 2015 , Warner Bros. announced that Cooper was in final talks to make his directorial debut with the film , and potentially to star with Beyoncé , who was again in talks to join ; Cooper did become the male lead .
On August 16 , 2016 , it was reported that Lady Gaga had officially become attached and the studio had green - lit the project to begin production early 2017 .
It marks the fourth remake of the original 1937 film , after the 1954 musical , the 1976 rock musical and the 2013 Bollywood romance film .
On November 9 , 2016 , it was reported that Ray Liotta was in talks to join the film in the role of the manager to Cooper 's character , though he ultimately was not involved .
On March 17 , 2017 , Sam Elliott joined the film , with Andrew Dice Clay entering negotiations to play Lorenzo , the father of Lady Gaga 's character .
Clay was selected over Robert De Niro , John Turturro and John Travolta .
In April 2017 , Rafi Gavron , Michael Harney , and Rebecca Field also joined the cast .
Filming began on April 17 , 2017 .
In May , Dave Chappelle was cast in the film .
In April 2018 , it was announced that Halsey would have a small role .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
After seeing him perform at Desert Trip festival , Cooper approached Lukas Nelson ( son of country music singer Willie Nelson ) and asked him to help work on the film .
Nelson agreed and wrote several songs , which he sent to the producers .
Nelson subsequently met Lady Gaga and began writing songs with her
and she , in turn , provided backing vocals on two tracks on his self - titled 2017 album .
The soundtrack , performed by Gaga and Cooper , was released on October 5 , 2018 , by Interscope Records .
The studio announced that the album " features 19 songs in a wide range of musical styles + 15 dialogue tracks that will take you on a journey that mirrors the experience of seeing the film . "
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
A Star Is Born had its world premiere at the Venice Film Festival on August 31 , 2018 .
It also screened at the Toronto International Film Festival , the San Sebastián International Film Festival , and the Zurich Film Festival in September 2018 .
The film was theatrically released in the United States on October 5 , 2018 , distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures , after initially having been set for September 28 , 2018 , and May 18 , 2018 , releases .
From December 7 , 2018 , the film had a limited release in IMAX theaters across United States and Canada .
Jeff Goldstein , President of Domestic Distribution ,
Warner Bros. Pictures , said , " Securing premium IMAX screens in this competitive holiday window , ten weeks into release , speaks to the quality of the film Bradley Cooper has delivered and the passion audiences have for this story .
We are thrilled to be able to give moviegoers a chance to see ' A Star Is Born ' again , or for the first time , in such an experiential format as IMAX . " HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Warner Bros. announced that the film would be available for digital download through retailers on January 15 , 2019 , followed by its release on Blu - ray , DVD and 4 K Ultra HD Blu - ray on February 19 .
The home video release will feature 10 minutes of never - before - seen musical performances by Cooper and Gaga , and jam recording sessions of songs like " Midnight Special " , " Is That Alright ? " and " Baby What You Want Me to Do " .
A behind - the - scenes feature called The Road to Stardom :
Making A Star Is Born would also be included along with the music videos for songs from the soundtrack : " Shallow " , " Always Remember Us This Way " , "
Look What I Found " and " I 'll Never Love Again " .
The 4 K Blu - ray format will have Dolby Vision high - dynamic - range video and Dolby Atmos sound which was remixed and tailored specifically for home environment viewing .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
, A Star Is Born has grossed $ 199.5 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 177.1 million in other territories , for a total worldwide gross of $ 376.6 million , against a production budget of $ 36–40 million .
In the United States and Canada , A Star Is Born grossed $ 1.35 million from select Tuesday and Wednesday night screenings , and $ 15.8 million on its first day , including $ 3.2 million from Thursday night previews .
It went on to debut to $ 42.9 million for the weekend and finished second at the box office , behind fellow newcomer Venom .
The film remained in second place in its second , third and fourth weekends , grossing a respective $ 28 million , $ 19.3 million and $ 14.1 million .
In the film 's 10th weekend of release , following the announcement of its five Golden Globe nominations , the film made $ 2.5 million ( up 38 % from the previous week ) , including $ 800,000 from a limited IMAX run .
Outside North America , the film was released day - and - date with the U.S. in 31 other countries , and made $ 14.2 million in its opening weekend ; its largest markets were the United Kingdom ( $ 5.3 million ) , France ( $ 2.1 million ) and Germany ( $ 1.9 million ) .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , A Star Is Born holds an approval rating of 90 % based on 436 reviews , with an average rating of 8.1/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " With appealing leads , deft direction , and an affecting love story ,
A Star Is Born is a remake done right — and a reminder that some stories can be just as effective in the retelling .
"
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 88 out of 100 , based on 60 critics , indicating " universal acclaim " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A " on an A+ to F scale , while PostTrak reported film - goers gave it a 90 % positive score .
Alonso Duralde of TheWrap gave the film a positive review , saying , " Cooper and Lady Gaga are dynamite together ; this is a story that lives and dies by the central relationship and the instant chemistry that must blossom between them , and these two have it in spades , " and praised the musical numbers , describing them as " electrifying " .
Owen Gleiberman of Variety lauded Cooper 's directing , co - writing , and acting , and called the film " a transcendent Hollywood movie " .
Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a B+ , singling out Gaga 's performance , saying , " she deserves praise for her restrained , human - scale performance as a singer whose real - girl vulnerability feels miles away from the glittery meat - dress delirium of her own stage persona . "
Stephanie Zacharek of Time magazine found the film superior to its previous iterations and similarly praised Cooper 's direction , the writing , as well the performances and chemistry of Cooper and Gaga .
She stated : " You come away feeling something for these people , flawed individuals who are trying to hold their cracked pieces of self together – or to mend the cracks of those they love , " also describing Gaga 's performance as a " knockout . "
In his review for Los Angeles Times , Justin Chang called the film " remarkable , " and praised Cooper for his fresh take on the well - worn formula of 1937 film , as well his direction , the performances , writing , and the cinematography .
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film 4.5 out of five stars , and deemed it as a " modern classic , " hailing the performances of Cooper and Gaga , and Cooper 's direction .
He found the film 's screenplay and the original songs " seamless " and " terrific , " and also called the film a major Oscar contender of the year and one of the year 's best films .
The Washington Posts Ann Hornaday described the film as " lavishly delightful " and " earthly convincing , " and added that it " offers a suitably jaundiced glimpse of starmaking machinery at its most cynical , but also its most thrilling and gratifying . "
She similarly praised Cooper 's direction , the performances and chemistry of Cooper and Gaga , and the supporting performances , particularly Andrew Dice Clay and Sam Elliott .
Writing for Chicago Sun - Times , Richard Roeper described it as " electric and shatteringly powerful " and remarked the film as one of the best iterations to its 1937 , 1954 , and the 1976 versions as well one of the best movies of the year .
While praising the direction , acting , and writing , Michael Phillips in the Chicago Tribune argues that a A Star is Born 's formula has always been very seductive to audiences , even when it has been written poorly , and Cooper 's few missteps include being a bit of a scene hog .
Admitting audiences love it , and he just liked it , Phillips drew attention to a skeptical review by Lindsey Romaine of Medium.com who criticized the story 's marginalization of the Gaga character in dealing with Cooper 's manipulative addict .
She at least wanted a scene where Gaga 's character processed her behavior of letting the addict boyfriend get away with it .
Phillips argued that it is in part the skillful musicianship which gets audiences to blow past such flaws .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
The film has won a number of awards and nominations .
It was chosen by both the National Board of Review and American Film Institute as one of the Top 10 Films of 2018 , and received five nominations at the 76th Golden Globe Awards , including Best Motion Picture – Drama .
SEE ALSO
* Lady Gaga videography
* List of Bradley Cooper performances
* List of directorial debuts * List of films featuring the deaf and hard of hearing REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS