SHADOWHUNTERS Shadowhunters , also known as Shadowhunters : The Mortal Instruments , is an American supernatural drama television series developed by Ed Decter , based on the popular book series The Mortal Instruments written by Cassandra Clare .
It premiered in North America on Freeform on January 12 , 2016 .
Primarily filmed in Toronto , Ontario , Canada , the series follows Clary Fray ( Katherine McNamara ) , who finds out on her eighteenth birthday that she is not who she thinks she is , but rather comes from a long line of Shadowhunters , human - angel hybrids who hunt down demons .
It is the second adaptation of the novel series , after the 2013 film , which like the series was produced by Constantin Film .
The debut season of Shadowhunters has received mixed responses from critics .
The pilot episode attracted the largest audience for Freeform in more than two years .
The show has received numerous award nominations , winning one GLAAD Award and four Teen Choice Awards .
The series was renewed for a second season of 20 episodes , which premiered on January 2 , 2017 .
In August 2016 , showrunner Ed Decter exited the series over " creative differences " .
Todd Slavkin and Darren Swimmer were named as Decter 's replacements .
In April 2017 , Freeform renewed the show for a third season of 20 episodes , which premiered on March 20 , 2018 .
In June 2018 , Freeform canceled the series after three seasons , but ordered two extra episodes to properly conclude the series ' story ; the second half of the third season is set to premiere on February 25 , 2019 , with 12 episodes ordered .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Clary Fray has just enrolled at Brooklyn Academy of Arts .
On her eighteenth birthday , she learns that she is a Shadowhunter , a human born with angelic blood who protects humans from demons and rogue downworlders .
That night , Clary 's mother , Jocelyn , is abducted by a group of rogue Shadowhunters called the Circle .
Their leader is Jocelyn 's ex - husband , Valentine Morgenstern , who is also Clary 's father .
With her mother missing , Clary turns to Luke , a person she trusted , only to be ' betrayed . '
Clary joins up with a group of Shadowhunters to save her mother and discovers powers she never knew she possessed but felt she had .
Clary is thrown into the world of demon hunting with the mysterious , narcissistic , and attractive Shadowhunter Jace , and also her loyal and geeky friend Simon .
Now living amongst the fair folk , warlocks , vampires , and werewolves , Clary begins a journey of self - discovery as she learns more about her past and what her future may hold .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* Katherine McNamara as Clary Fairchild * Dominic Sherwood as Jace Herondale * Alberto Rosende as Simon Lewis * Matthew Daddario as Alec Lightwood * Emeraude Toubia as Isabelle Lightwood
* Isaiah Mustafa as Luke Garroway
* Harry Shum Jr. as Magnus Bane * Alisha Wainwright as Maia Roberts ( season 3 ; recurring season 2 )
RECURRING
* Alan van Sprang as Valentine Morgenstern * Maxim Roy as Jocelyn Fairchild
* Vanessa Matsui as Dot Rollins * Jon Cor as Hodge Starkweather * David Castro as Raphael Santiago * Jade Hassouné as Meliorn * Kaitlyn Leeb as Camille Belcourt * Christina Cox as Elaine Lewis
* Nicola Correia - Damude as Maryse Lightwood * Paulino Nunes as Robert Lightwood * Jack Fulton as Max Lightwood * Holly Deveaux as Rebecca Lewis * Stephanie Bennett as Lydia Branwell * Raymond Ablack as Raj * Mimi Kuzyk as Imogen Herondale * Joel Labelle as Alaric * Jordan Hudyma as Blackwell * Shailene Garnett as Maureen Brown * Stephen R. Hart as Brother Jeremiah
* Nick Sagar as Victor Aldertree
* Will Tudor as Sebastian Verlac / Jonathan Morgenstern * Anna Hopkins as Lilith * Luke Baines as Jonathan Morgenstern * Alexandra Ordolis as Olivia Wilson * Chai Hansen as Jordan Kyle * Tessa Mossey as Heidi McKenzie EPISODES
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
In 2010 , Screen Gems announced that they were going into production on the of City of Bones , the first book in The Mortal Instruments series , with hopes of starting a successful film franchise .
Production on a film adaptation of the second book , City of Ashes , was due to start in September 2013 , but was delayed to 2014 , and eventually cancelled , after the first film failed to recoup its budget .
On October 12 , 2014 , at Mipcom , Constantin confirmed that The Mortal Instruments will return as a television series with Ed Decter as showrunner .
Constantin Film and TV head Martin Moszkowicz told The Hollywood Reporter that , " It actually makes sense to do [ the novels ] as a TV series .
There was so much from the book that we had to leave out of the Mortal Instruments film .
In the series we 'll be able to go deeper and explore this world in greater detail and depth .
" The producers hope to adapt the entire book series if the TV adaptation proves successful .
In February 2015 , book series author Cassandra Clare announced via Twitter that the television series would be called Shadowhunters rather than The Mortal Instruments .
In March 2015 , ABC Family picked up Shadowhunters straight - to - series .
The series was renewed for a second season in March 2016 , consisting of 20 episodes , which premiered on January 2 , 2017 .
In April 2017 , it was announced that the series was renewed for a third season of 20 episodes .
The first half of ten episodes premiered on March 20 , 2018 .
On June 4 , 2018 , Freeform canceled the series after three seasons , but ordered two extra episodes to properly conclude the series ' story ; the second half of the third season is set to premiere on February 25 , 2019 .
In August 2016 , soon before filming on the second season was to begin , showrunner Ed Decter exited the series over " creative differences " .
Todd Slavkin and Darren Swimmer , who were former showrunners on Smallville , were announced as Decter 's replacements in August 2016 .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
On Twitter , Cassandra Clare announced that she would not be part of casting decisions , and would not be expecting any of the original film cast to return .
On April 20 , 2015 , ABC revealed Dominic Sherwood as the first member of the Shadowhunters cast .
On May 1 , 2015 , it was announced that Emeraude Toubia would be taking the role of Isabelle Lightwood and Alberto Rosende would be joining the cast as Simon Lewis .
On May 6 , it was reported that Katherine McNamara landed the lead role of Clary Fray .
Two days later , on May 8 , Matthew Daddario and Isaiah Mustafa were cast as Alec Lightwood and Luke Garroway , respectively .
Harry Shum , Jr. and Alan van Sprang later joined the cast on May 15 , as Magnus Bane and Valentine Morgenstern .
On May 18 , it was announced that Maxim Roy would be playing Jocelyn Fray .
On May 28 , Jon Cor was announced to play Hodge Starkweather , a Shadowhunter and former member of the Circle .
David Castro was reported to be portraying vampire Raphael Santiago on June 4 .
Shortly after , on June 9 , Lisa Marcos announced she would be joining the cast as Captain Vargas , a new character created for the series by Ed Decter .
On June 12 , producer McG 's official Twitter account stated that Kaitlyn Leeb had been cast to play the vampire , Camille Belcourt .
On June 16 , Jade Hassouné was reported to be portraying the faerie , Meliorn .
On August 8 , Stephanie Bennett was cast as the new character Lydia Branwell , a rule - following Shadowhunter .
On September 2 , 2016 , Alisha Wainwright was announced to play Maia Roberts in the second season , and soon promoted to series regular beginning on season 3 .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
The series began filming in Mississauga , Canada on May 25 , 2015 .
The fictional New York Police Department 's 89 Precinct was filmed in the Science Wing at the University of Toronto
Scarborough . MUSIC SOUNDTRACK Section::::Music .
Section::::Soundtrack .
Shadowhunters ( Original Television Series Soundtrack ) was released on platforms including iTunes , Spotify and Apple Music on July 21 , 2017 , featuring six original songs from the show .
The series ' musical score is composed by Ben Decter .
The opening theme song is " This Is The Hunt " performed by Ruelle , which was written for Shadowhunters by Maggie Eckford and Jeff Bowman .
Other Ruelle songs have featured in the series .
Ruelle performs most of the background music during the series .
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
The series premiered on January 12 , 2016 , in the U.S. on Freeform .
The second episode , " The Descent into Hell Is Easy " , was released online that same day , following the premiere of the first episode .
In December 2015 , Netflix acquired global rights to Shadowhunters , excluding the U.S. , making the series available as an original series a day after the U.S. premiere , with the first episode having launched globally on January 13 , 2016 , and subsequent episodes having been released on a weekly basis .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The debut season of Shadowhunters received mixed responses from critics .
Metacritic gave it a 45 out of 100 rating , based on 9 reviews , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Rotten Tomatoes gave the series a 46 % rating , based on 12 reviews , with an average rating of 5.6/10 .
The site 's consensus states , " Shadowhunters boasts visual thrills and a potential - rich premise , but they 're not enough to overcome the show 's self - serious silliness and dull , convoluted plots . "
According to James Poniewozik of The New York Times , the series " has its assets , especially its popular source material .
But it might become more fun if it learns to enjoy being the empowerment fantasy it really is . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Nominee(s ) !
Result ! class="unsortable
"
BMI Film & TV AwardsGLAAD Awards rowspan="5"People 's Choice Awards REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS