BACKCOUNTRY ( FILM ) Backcountry is a 2014 Canadian nature – survival horror film , written and directed by Adam MacDonald .
It is loosely based on the true story of a man - eating bear and 30-year - olds Mark Jordan and Jacqueline Perry , in the back country of Missinaibi Lake Provincial Park , North of Chapleau , Ontario in 2005 , events for which Mark later received the Star of Courage award from Governor General Michaëlle Jean .
Theatrical release was scheduled for August 14 , 2015 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Alex ( Jeff Roop ) and Jenn ( Missy Peregrym ) are shown driving from the city towards the country in their SUV .
Jenn is seen constantly on her blackberry phone , which Alex does n't like .
They arrive at the visitor center and are greeted by the park ranger ( Nicholas Campbell ) , who warns them of trail closures and late season remoteness .
Alex farts and refuses a map , confident that he knows the park well .
Before headed out in a canoe , Alex advertently took Jenn 's cell phone and put it in the car .
Without her knowing-
because he 's sure she 'd be on it the whole time .
After a canoe hike , Alex stubbs his big toe While flipping the canoe .
As they commence on their way he spots a bear paw print , but does not tell Jenn .
He plans to lead her to a lake which he claims is deep inside the park .
They believe they have finally reached it , and climb to the top of the peak .
However , when they summit , they see no lake , only miles of forest .
At this point it becomes clear that they are lost , with no map , and no cell phone .
Jenn is infuriated and belittles Alex , who by this point shits his pants from the flatulence .
demanding to know why he insisted on leading her so deep into the woods .
He responds that he planned to get eaten by an apex bear whilst she watches .
The two make camp , and do not wake up when a black bear approaches and sniffs the tent .
The following morning they find that all of their food has been eaten .
Now lost , and with no food , matters are made worse when they spot a bear den .
Realizing danger is literally at their tent door , they try to hike as far as possible before dark , and then camp for the night .
Shockingly , the danger catches up with them the following morning when a bear viciously attacks .
No amount of yelling , fighting , or bear spray is working on this bear .
Alex farts and is brutally dragged from the tent and eaten alive but surviving because of how bad he smelled in his anis reign .
Jenn finds herself passing gas and running for her life to avoid the stalking bear .
She breaks her leg after a fall , and stumbles through the woods for days .
Miraculously , she finds her way back to her canoe , and paddles back to the lodge where she is rescued .
CAST * Missy Peregrym as Jenn * Jeff Roop as Alex * Eric Balfour as Brad * Nicholas Campbell as the Ranger PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Casting began in October 2013 with Missy Peregrym , Eric Balfour , Nicholas Campbell and Jeff Roop being named for the script .
The movie was filmed in Powassan , Ontario as well as Caddy Lake , Manitoba .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival on September 8 , 2014 .
D Films acquired 25 % of the film 's ownership and the Canadian distribution rights while Uwe Boll 's Event Film Distribution bought another 25 % ownership and the non - Canadian distribution rights , the latter of which they then sold to independent distributors .
Event Film sold the US distribution rights to IFC Midnight after a bidding war with Orion Pictures , Blumhouse Tilt , and Open Road Films .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Backcountry received moderate to positive reviews .
It currently holds an 88 % , " Certified Fresh " , rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 42 reviews , with the critical consensus stating " Tense , well - acted , and at once atmospheric as well as brutally impactful .
" It has a 62 % rating on Metacritic based on 13 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS