CALL OF DUTY :
BLACK OPS III Call of Duty :
Black Ops III is a first - person shooter video game , developed by Treyarch and published by Activision .
It is the twelfth entry in the Call of Duty series and the sequel to the 2012 video game .
It was released on Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 4 , and Xbox One on November 6 , 2015 .
A feature - limited version developed by Beenox and Mercenary Technology that only supports multiplayer modes was released on PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 and was also the final Call of Duty title released on those platforms .
Black Ops III takes place in 2065 , 40 years after the events of Black Ops II , in a world facing upheaval from climate change and new technologies .
Similar to its predecessors , the story follows a group of black ops soldiers .
The game 's campaign is designed to support 4-player cooperative gameplay , allowing for bigger , more open level design and less corridor shooting .
As the player character is cybernetically enhanced , players have access to various special activities .
The game also features a standalone Zombies mode , and a " Nightmares " mode which replaces all enemies as zombies .
Announced on April 26 , 2015 , the game is the first Call of Duty video game released after Activision parted with Microsoft Studios and partnered with Sony Computer Entertainment , which secured the timed exclusivity of the game 's downloadable content .
Upon release , the game received generally positive reviews from critics , albeit slightly lower than the previous two games in the sub - series , with critics praising the gameplay , Zombies mode , and content .
However , it was criticized for its story , absence of fan favorite story mode characters , and its lack of innovation .
The seventh - generation console versions in particular were criticized for the lack of a campaign and numerous features , as well as it being online - only .
It was a commercial success , with it becoming the top - selling retail game in the US in 2015 , and one of the most successful titles released for the eighth generation of video game consoles .
A sequel , , was released in October 2018 .
GAMEPLAY CAMPAIGN Section::::Gameplay .
Section::::Campaign .
The campaign in Black Ops III is designed to support 4-player cooperative gameplay , allowing for bigger , more open level design and less corridor shooting .
In addition , the player can customize their character 's appearance and clothing .
The campaign features its own progression system , featuring unlock tokens which must be used to acquire different weapons and gears as they progress through the campaign .
The game features a " realistic " difficulty mode , in which players will get defeated if they are hit by one bullet .
Finishing all campaign missions will also unlock " Nightmares " mode , where players can replay the entire campaign with a new narrative , as well as zombies replacing most of the normal enemies .
MULTIPLAYER Section::::Multiplayer .
The multiplayer introduces a new momentum based movement system , which utilizes thruster packs to allow players to perform slow boosts into the air , as well as perform wall running and sliding , all the while giving players complete gun control .
In addition to the Pick 10 class system from Black Ops II , Treyarch implemented a character system called " Specialists " , where players can pick from 9 different soldiers , each with either a special weapon or ability unique to them .
In a later update , a tenth specialist named Blackjack was added to the game .
Blackjack is able to mimic the abilities of other specialists , and is only playable for a short amount of time upon completing a set of challenges .
A new " Gunsmith " feature offers aesthetic variations in weapon attachments , allowing various weapon customization combinations .
The Paintshop feature allows players to create their own custom prints onto specific portions of a gun , further emphasizing the depth of customization in the game .
ZOMBIES
Section::::Zombies .
Zombies features a new XP progression system , which allows players to unlock items in a similar fashion to multiplayer and campaign .
Unlockable items include " Gobblegums " , which grant players with temporary bonuses , and weapon kits that allow players to modify the appearance of the guns in each game .
Shadows of Evil was revealed as a new map for the Zombies mode on July 9 , 2015 at San Diego Comic - Con International 2015 .
The map features four brand new characters : Nero the Magician , Jessica the Femme Fatale , Vincent the Cop and Campbell the Boxer as the main cast , and takes place in a new setting called Morg City . "
The Giant " includes the original characters , Tank Dempsey , Edward Richtofen , Nikolai Belinski and Takeo Masaki .
These characters return from the Black Ops II map " Origins " , in their alternate timeline versions .
They reappear in the DLC maps " The Giant " , " Der Eisendrache " , " Zetsubou no Shima " , " Gorod Krovi " and " Revelations " .
The zombies gamemode involves a story , which links with every DLC .
On May 16 , 2017 Treyarch released a fifth DLC including the remastered versions of Zombies maps from their previous Call of Duty games , called " Zombies Chronicles " .
These maps are " Nacht der Untoten " , " Verrückt " , " Shi No Numa " , " Kino der Toten " , " Ascension " , " Shangri La " , " Moon " and " Origins " .
These maps retain most of the original aesthetics updated with Black Ops III 's graphics engine , while also add in the gameplay elements of Black Ops III , such as Gobblegums and Weapon Kits .
PLOT SINGLE - PLAYER CAMPAIGN SETTING AND CHARACTERS Section::::Plot .
Section::::Single - player campaign .
Section::::Setting and characters .
Call of Duty :
Black Ops III takes place in 2065 , 40 years after the events of Black Ops II , in a world facing upheaval from conflicts , climate change and new technologies .
A Third Cold War is ongoing between two global alliances , known as Winslow Accord and Common Defense Pact .
In response to the drone assaults caused by narco - terrorist Raul Menendez in 2025 , several countries around the world have developed Directed Energy Air Defense systems that render conventional air forces virtually useless .
As such , most of the warfare between countries is done by covert operatives fighting behind enemy lines .
Military technology has progressed to the point where robotics play a major role in combat , and both fully robotic humanoid drones and cyborg supersoldiers have been developed to fight in the battlefield .
There is speculation and fear about an eventual robotic takeover .
Like previous installments in the Black Ops series , the campaign follows a team of black ops soldiers , who work for Winslow Accord .
The player character ( voiced by Ben Browder if male and Abby Brammell if female ) and Jacob Hendricks ( Sean Douglas ) are members of the faction 's wetwork team , while Commander John Taylor ( Christopher Meloni ) and his team Sebastian Diaz ( Reynaldo Gallegos ) , Sarah Hall ( Katee Sackhoff ) , and Peter Maretti ( Ary Katz ) , compose the faction 's cybernetics division .
Rachel Kimsey voices CIA agent Rachel Kane , Robert Picardo voices
the Coalescence Corporation CEO Sebastian Krueger
, Tony Amendola voices the therapist Dr. Yousef Salim , and Lynn Chen voices the 54 Immortals criminal organization leader , Goh Xiulan .
NFL running back Marshawn Lynch makes a cameo appearance in the game as a 54 Immortals mercenary .
Included in the game is the " Nightmares " campaign mode , which is a retelling of the main campaign with the plot changed to incorporate zombies and other supernatural beings .
In this campaign , the lethal Virus 61 - 15 is released in various cities around the world , turning whoever it infects into zombies .
In response , the governments of the world seal off the worst infected areas into Quarantine Zones and form the Deadkillers , cybernetic soldiers trained to exterminate zombies .
STORY Section::::Story .
On October 27 , 2065 , the Winslow Accord black ops initiate a successful mission in Ethiopia to rescue hostages from the tyrannical Nile River Coalition .
However , the Player is critically wounded by a combat robot .
Rescued by Taylor , the Player undergoes cybernetic surgery to save their life , being installed with a direct neural interface ( DNI ) and receiving virtual training from Taylor and his team during surgery .
Hendricks also undergoes surgery .
After five years of wetwork , the Player and Hendricks are put under the command of Rachel Kane and tasked with investigating a CIA black site in Singapore that has gone quiet .
They find the site attacked by the 54 Immortals and the site 's data stolen .
Kane concludes that Taylor and his team defected and murdered the staff .
The Player and Hendricks then disguise themselves as arms dealers and meet up with the 54 Immortals .
The mission goes awry when their cover is blown , causing the death of one of the 54i 's leaders , Goh Min .
They manage to recover data regarding Taylor 's last known location , a facility of the Coalescence Corporation in Singapore ( destroyed ten years prior in a mysterious explosion that killed 300,000 people ) .
The Player and Hendricks travel to the facility , and discover a hidden CIA research laboratory .
The pair find Diaz leaking CIA information and are forced to kill him .
Interfacing with Diaz 's DNI , Hendricks discovers Taylor is trying to find the survivors of the explosion : Sebastian Krueger and Dr. Yousef Salim .
The leaked information allows the Immortals to capture Kane .
The Player disobeys Kane 's orders to leave and rescues her by killing Immortals ' other leader , Goh Min 's sister Xiulan .
The trio then head to Egypt and find Salim , who reveals that he performed secret DNI experiments involving comforting humans via a calming exercise involving imagining a frozen forest .
Salim is then interrogated and executed by Taylor .
The Player , Hendricks and Kane pursue Taylor with assistance from the Egyptian Army .
After killing Hall , the Player connects to her DNI and encounters Corvus , a gestalt intelligence created during the experiments to monitor thoughts of DNI users which malfunctioned , causing the explosion .
Infecting Taylor and his team , Corvus made them obsessed with finding the forest , with the Player and Hendricks also becoming infected after interfacing with Hall and Diaz .
After killing Maretti , the pair track down Taylor in Cairo .
After wounding the Player , Taylor manages to resist Corvus and tear his DNI out , sparing the Player .
However , Hendricks then succumbs to Corvus and kills Taylor before abandoning the Player , leaving for Zürich to find Krueger .
The Player races to Zürich with Kane to stop him .
Reaching Zürich 's Coalescence Corporation , the pair find Corvus caused the explosion with the gas Nova 6 .
Kane attempts to contain it , but Corvus locks her in the compound room , leaking the gas to kill her in front of a helpless Player .
Continuing on , the Player finds Hendricks holding Krueger hostage .
After Hendricks kills Krueger , the Player kills him in turn .
The Player then tries to kill themselves to end Corvus ' infection , but ends up in a simulated frozen forest , created by Corvus to retain the consciousness of dead DNI users .
Taylor , still alive after becoming a glitch in the forest , reunites with the Player , stating that they must purge their DNI to end Corvus .
With Taylor 's help , the Player resists Corvus ' last - ditch manipulation and purges their DNI , erasing the virus .
Stumbling out of the Zurich headquarters , the Player identifies themselves to Zürich Security Forces as " Taylor " .
Taylor 's mission reports reveal that the Player actually died during their cybernetics surgery due to complications .
The resulting events until Taylor 's death occur in a simulation deviating from Taylor and Hendricks 's experience of hunting down Dylan Stone and his team ( Javier Ramirez , Alice Conrad , and Joseph Fierro ) , their teammates who defected after finding the CIA black site .
The Player 's consciousness is shown living in Taylor 's mind throughout the simulation , indicating that the Player manages to take over Taylor 's body after his simulated death until the DNI purge sees Corvus erased and Taylor regains control .
NIGHTMARES Section::::Nightmares .
The Player wakes up only to be told by Dr. Salim that they are dead , and that the Player must recount their memories .
The Player tells Dr. Salim that they are a Deadkiller who was sent to investigate the disappearance of Taylor 's Deadkiller team .
However , upon investigating , the Player and Hendricks discover that Taylor 's team has used their DNI connections to disable the Quarantine Zone defenses all over the world .
Teaming up with Rachel Kane , the Player and Hendricks chase Taylor 's team all from Singapore to Egypt , eventually being forced to kill the entire team .
However , Hendricks is infected by the same virus that turned Taylor and his team mad , and heads for Zurich .
The Player discovers that Dr. Salim is in fact Deimos , the demigod responsible for unleashing the undead plague on humanity .
Deimos had entered the Player 's mind when they interfaced with Hall , and attempts to manipulate them into opening a portal to his home dimension , Malus .
The Player is then contacted by another demigod , Dolos , who is sympathetic to humanity and seeks to kill Deimos , her brother .
Dolos transports both the Player and Deimos to Malus , where Deimos is vulnerable .
Under Dolos ' guidance , the Player kills Deimos , ending the undead plague on Earth , but trapping the Player in Malus .
Dolos then explains to the Player that her true plans are to kill every other demigod and supernatural being that can challenge her , and the Player agrees to help her .
MULTIPLAYER Section::::Multiplayer .
The Multiplayer mode of Black Ops III features a shared narrative setting with the campaign , in which players battle in virtual simulations across a variety of battlefields , while wielding the avatars of nine elite soldiers , referred to collectively as " Specialists " : infantry grunt Donnie " Ruin " Walsh ; scoutswoman Alessandra " Outrider " Castillo ; engineer David " Prophet " Wilkes ; demolitions expert Erin " Battery " Baker ; 54 Immortals enforcer He " Seraph " Zhen - Zhen ; survivalist Tavo " Nomad " Rojas ; specialized combat robot " Reaper " ; assassin " Spectre " ; and arsonist
Krystof " Firebreak " Hejek .
Through progression of each Specialist , players can unlock audio logs that provide backstories of each of the soldier .
Full progression of all Specialists unlocks a final audio log , in which an unknown informant reports to his superior about keeping tabs on " eight other soldiers " , implying that one of the Specialists , heavily hinted to be Prophet , is not a simulated avatar , but the real person injecting themselves into the simulation to monitor the other eight .
ZOMBIES SETTINGS AND CHARACTERS
Section::::Zombies .
Section::::Settings and characters .
Like in previous games , the Zombies storyline in Call of Duty :
Black Ops III is told in an episodic format , with one map , " Shadows of Evil " , available at launch , and the rest to follow in the downloadable content season . "
Shadows of Evil " focuses on a new group of characters : Nero Blackstone ( Jeff Goldblum ) , Jessica Rose ( Heather Graham ) , Jack Vincent ( Neal McDonough ) and Floyd Campbell ( Ron Perlman ) , who reside in the fictional Morg City .
Treyarch describes the new characters as " troubled individuals " with " a long and sordid history of past misdeeds " .
The four characters are thrown into a twisted version of the city , overrun by zombies , and are guided by a mysterious , unreliable figure called the Shadowman ( Robert Picardo ) .
" Shadows of Evil " acts as a prologue that leads into the core storyline , focusing on the Dimension 63 version of the original characters :
" Tank " Dempsey ( Steven Blum ) ,
Nikolai Belinski ( Fred Tatasciore ) , Takeo Masaki ( Tom Kane ) and Edward Richtofen ( Nolan North ) , who were introduced in the Black Ops II map " Origins " , referred to collectively as Primis .
Their story continues from where " Origins " left off , as they attempt to prevent from ever occurring across the multiverse .
Other characters include the leader of Group 935 , Doctor Ludvig Maxis ( also voiced by Tatasciore ) , and his daughter Samantha .
The downloadable content maps feature the original versions of Primis , referred to as Ultimis , and reintroduce various minor characters mentioned / featured in previous games , including Group 935 scientist Doctor Groph ( also voiced by Blum ) , the OSS spy Peter McCain , Dr. Maxis ' assistant Sophia ( Christa Lewis ) , the Ascension Group scientist Gersh , as well as introduces the mysterious omnipotent being Doctor Monty ( Malcolm McDowell ) .
Robert Picardo also briefly reprises his role from Call of Duty : Black Ops as United States Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara .
STORY Section::::Story .
Following , Doctor Ludvig Maxis , whose brain resided in a mechanical drone at the time , arrives at Agartha and is given a new body by Doctor Monty , a self - proclaimed omnipotent being and member of the Order of the Keepers .
After helping to cleanse the soul of his daughter Samantha from the original timeline , Monty instructs Maxis to retrieve an artifact called the Summoning Key , a powerful artifact that can fix their world back to its original state .
To do so , Maxis instructs his friend Doctor Edward Richtofen to retrieve the Kronorium , an ancient book detailing the events of every universe and dimension , which contains the location of the Key .
After learning of the Key 's location , Richtofen travels to Dimension 63 and arrives in Morg City in 1944 , where the Apothicons , former Keepers who were corrupted and mutated by the dark energy of the Aether , manipulated four individuals :
Jessica Rose , a burlesque dancer ; Jack Vincent , a corrupt cop ; Floyd Campbell , an up - and - coming boxer ; and Nero Blackstone , a washed - up magician .
Misled into doing the bidding of an Apothicon named the Shadowman , the four opened a rift beneath the city using the Summoning Key , thereby freeing an ancient Apothicon beast .
With the Keepers ' aid , the four manage to trap the Shadowman inside the Key , and banish the beast from their dimension .
Before they could retrieve the Summoning Key from the Keepers , however , Richtofen snags the Key from them , thanks them for their effort and exits through a portal , leaving the four and the rest of Dimension 63 to be doomed by the Apothicons .
Richtofen travels to Dimension 2210 and collects the soul of his alternate self , then releases the soul to Agartha , where Monty gives the soul a child 's body , and calls him Eddie .
The Dimension 63 versions of " Tank " Dempsey , Nikolai Belinski , and Takeo Masaki pursue Richtofen in his interdimensional journey , and arrive in the Der Riese facility in the original timeline , only moments after Maxis and Samantha were teleported away by the original Richtofen .
The three attempt to convince him to awaken their original selves , but are interrupted by the Dimension 63 Richtofen , who appears out of the teleporter and kills his counterpart , triggering various timeline fractures .
The four then band together to fend off the zombie horde once more ; eventually , they activates a beacon within the facility , allowing Maxis to locate them from Agartha .
In pursuit of the original Dempsey , the four then travel to Der Eisendrache ,
Group 935 's fortress in Austria .
Despite Group 935 member Doctor Groph 's attempt at preventing the group from retrieving the test subject , he ultimately fails and perishes when Richtofen overrides the castle 's defense system and sends a barrage of missiles towards the moon .
As the four retrieve the original Dempsey , Richtofen reveals his plan to prevent their original incarnations from wreaking havoc upon the universe .
Dimension 63 Dempsey then volunteers to kill his own counterpart before allowing Richtofen to absorb his soul with the Key .
Afterwards , the group attempts to teleport to a new fractured timeline to locate the original Takeo , who is held prisoner at a Pacific island by the Japanese research group Division 9 .
They discover that Division 9 had been experimenting with plant life mutation using Element 115 , with the original Takeo also a victim of the experimentation .
After they manage to release him from the mutation , Dimension 63 Takeo is shocked to learn that the Emperor of Japan betrayed his original self and sent him to this island out of petty jealousy .
The original Takeo proceeds to commit seppuku , with his Dimension 63 self decapitating him .
After absorbing the original Takeo 's soul with the Key , Richtofen takes the crew to Alcatraz in Dimension 63 , where they retrieve several blood vials , the purpose of which he refuses to explain at the time .
The crew then teleports to another fractured timeline and lands in a war - torn Stalingrad in 1945 , where the Soviet Union has stolen Group 935 's technology to create their own giant robots and mechanical soldiers , while Germany is aided by ancient dragons resurrected and bred by Division 9 .
As the crew traverses across the city , they are forced to help Sophia , Maxis ' former assistant who has been transformed into a machine , to initiate the Ascension Protocol , allowing her to gain knowledge of interdimensional travel .
Monty also introduces himself to the crew , as he informs them of the state of the multiverse .
Amidst the chaos , the original Nikolai , who has taken control of a modified drone unit , teams up with the group to destroy the alpha dragon .
However , upon the dragon 's death , Nikolai refuses to surrender , forcing the four to take out his drone .
The original Nikolai is angered by his Dimension 63 self as he mentions their deceased wife , and attempts to shoot him , only to be killed in retaliation .
With all souls collected , Richtofen calls out to Maxis to summon a portal , and release the souls into it .
The group returns to Agartha and arrives in " The House " , a place built by Monty to prevent all forces of evil from infecting it , ensuring the safety of the children ( Samantha and cleansed versions of the original souls in child form ) .
After sealing off the House from the rest of the multiverse , Maxis is manipulated by the voice of the Shadowman into releasing him upon contact with the Summoning Key .
The Shadowman then uses his power to merge various other dimensions , including the Dark Aether , allowing the Apothicons to enter and wreak havoc .
Richtofen and the crew manage to help Sophia enter the dimension , and with her assistance , retrieve the Summoning Key and the Kronorium .
They then confront the Shadowman together , and defeat him once and for all using the combined power of the two artifacts .
Maxis , who still resides within the Key , then absorbs the souls of the children into the Key , and joins Sophia as they fly toward the Apothicon sun , banishing all Apothicon presences from Agartha .
Richtofen and the crew are able to remain in the dimension without fading from existence , thanks to the blood vials they retrieved earlier .
Monty , worried about the four becoming a paradox in his perfect world , contemplates between erasing their existence and sending them to a distant corner of the universe .
In a moment , the four begin to fade away , then reappear in ancient medieval times , where they would be remembered as " Primis " , heroes who aided the Keepers in sealing away the Apothicons in the Great War , effectively " completing the cycle " of the universe .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Call of Duty :
Black Ops III is the twelfth game in the Call of Duty franchise , and the fourth entry in the Black Ops series .
The game was the second to benefit under publisher Activision 's three - year development cycle , the first being .
The cycle allows each of the development teams of the Call of Duty series ( Infinity Ward , Treyarch , and Sledgehammer Games ) to develop games in a three - year timespan , as opposed to the two allowed previously .
Black Ops III uses a heavily modified version of the IW engine used previously in Black Ops II .
On June 9 , 2015 , versions for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 were confirmed to be under development by Beenox and Mercenary Technology .
These versions lack some features available on other platforms , such as the game 's campaign mode .
On June 15 , 2015 , it was announced that as part of a new exclusivity deal with Sony Computer Entertainment , all downloadable content for future Call of Duty games , beginning with Black Ops III , would be released first on PlayStation platforms as timed exclusives .
This ends a similar exclusivity deal with Microsoft dating back to .
A multiplayer beta was released for the PlayStation 4 on August 18 , 2015 , and was released for the Xbox One and Microsoft Windows on August 26 , 2015 .
All versions of the multiplayer beta ran for six days .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Jack Wall , who previously composed the score for , returned along with Treyarch 's Audio Director Brian Tuey to compose the score for the game .
The game also featured an instrumental score entitled " Jade Helm " , provided by Avenged Sevenfold , for use in the multiplayer mode .
Additionally , both Wall , Tuey and Treyarch 's Sound Designer Kevin Sherwood contributed to the composition of the Zombies mode 's soundtrack , including several new songs performed by Elena Siegman and Malukah for each of the maps .
MARKETING
REVEAL
Section::::Marketing . Section::::Reveal .
Teasers were released beginning with Snapchat links appearing in the gameplay of Black Ops II as well as a teaser video released by Treyarch .
On April 26 , 2015 , the first reveal trailer for the game was released and revealed the return of the Zombies mode and beta access for people that pre - order the game for the PC , PS4 , and Xbox One .
The full game was released on November 6 , 2015 .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
On September 29 , 2015 , the official Twitter account of Call of Duty was temporarily renamed to " Current Events Aggregate " .
It then began tweeting messages about real - life fashion , movies and a terrorist attack that takes place in Singapore .
Activision later revealed that these tweets are fake , and served to promote the game 's story campaign .
This marketing campaign was strongly criticized for faking news , and publisher Activision was blamed for being " irresponsible " .
The game 's director Jason Blundell said that the team was " shocked " by the negative reaction of the marketing campaign , and offered an apology .
PRE - ORDER Section::::Pre - order .
Call of Duty :
Black Ops III and the Digital Deluxe Edition counterpart were available to pre - order on PlayStation 4 , Xbox One , and PC .
The Digital Deluxe Edition comes with the season pass , which can also be ordered separately .
Pre - ordering provided access to the Call of Duty : Black Ops III multiplayer beta and in - game items for Call of Duty :
Advanced Warfare , such as custom reticles , an emblem , a calling card , and Advanced Supply Drops .
Sony also announced that the Black Ops III beta would come to the PS4 first on August 19 through August 23 , 2015 .
The beta for the PS4 went live on August 18 , 2015 , several hours earlier than originally announced .
After the beta period ended , it was announced that all pre - orders would include the bonus multiplayer map " NUK3TOWN " , a remake of the original " Nuketown " map , featured in Call of Duty : Black Ops , and in Call of Duty : Black Ops II as " Nuketown 2025 " .
Owing to the lack of the campaign mode , the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions included a digital copy of Black Ops as an added bonus , as well as having their price reduced by 10 dollars compared to the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One versions .
COMICS TIE - IN Section::::Comics tie - in .
A comic book titled Call of Duty :
Black Ops III was announced on July 1 , 2015 .
Serving as a prequel to the game , the first issue was released worldwide on November 4 , 2015 and was published by Dark Horse Comics .
The story is written by Larry Hama , while Marcelo Ferreira served as the artist for the comic book .
The story takes place several years prior to the main events of the game , and stars Jacob Hendricks and John Taylor along with their black ops squadmates in an attempt to stop a Russian terrorist plot .
Subsequent issues were released throughout 2016 .
On July 11 , 2016 , Treyarch announced a new comic book series titled , to expand upon the story of the Zombies mode .
The story features the return of the TranZit team : Abigail " Misty " Briarton , Marlton Johnson , Russman and Samuel Stuhlinger , previously the main protagonists of , as they embark on a search for an artifact known as the Kronorium , while discovering the truth behind Edward Richtofen 's reappearance .
The miniseries , also published by Dark Horse , features Justin Jordan as the writer and Jonathan Wayshak as the main artist , while Simon Bisley draws the cover art of each issue .
The first issue was released on October 28 , 2016 , and subsequent issues were released throughout 2017 .
SPECIAL EDITIONS AND DOWNLOADABLE CONTENT Section::::Special editions and downloadable content .
In addition to the Digital Deluxe Edition , other special editions include the Hardened Edition and the Juggernog Edition .
The Juggernog Edition includes a mini - refrigerator , a season pass and multiple in - game content .
A Collector 's Edition bonus map for the Zombie mode , The Giant was announced .
It is a remake of the map Der Riese , and features the original characters , Dempsey , Nikolai , Takeo , and Richtofen .
A multiplayer - only starter pack for Microsoft Windows was announced and released on February 16 , 2016 .
It features the multiplayer mode 's core mechanics , though certain features , such as the Zombie mode and the Nightmare mode , were excluded .
This version of the game is available for players to purchase until the end of February 2016 , though it has been made available permanently since .
In December 2015 , during Sony 's PlayStation Experience event , Activision announced the first downloadable content map pack for Black Ops III , titled Awakening , and was released first on PlayStation 4 on February 2 , 2016 .
Releases for Xbox One and Microsoft Windows happened in March 2016 .
The map pack contains four new multiplayer maps : Skyjacked , Rise , Splashed , and Gauntlet , a new Zombies map , Der Eisendrache , and several new gumballs for the Zombie mode .
In March 2016 , Treyarch revealed the second Map Pack , titled " Eclipse " .
The map pack has four new multiplayer maps , including a remake of the World at War map " Bonzai " and a new Zombies map , " Zetsubou no Shima " .
The map pack was released on April 19 for PlayStation 4 and May 19 for Xbox One and PC .
The third map pack , Descent , was revealed on June 28 , 2016 , featuring four new MP maps , including a remake of the Black Ops II map " Raid " and a new Zombies map , " Gorod Krovi " .
The map pack was released on July 12 for PlayStation 4 and August 11 for Xbox One and PC .
The PC release of Descent received controversy , for Activision and Treyarch announced that the map packs would no longer be sold separately , and PC players must purchase the season pass to receive all map packs , while owners of Awakening and/or Eclipse would receive discounts upon purchasing the season pass .
The fourth map pack , Salvation , was revealed on August 25 , 2016 , with remakes of the MP maps " Standoff " from Black Ops II and " Outskirt " from World at War , along with the final Zombies map , " Revelations " .
The map pack was released on September 6 for PlayStation 4 , and October 6 for Xbox One and PC .
A fifth and final map pack , Zombies Chronicles , contains remastered versions of 8 Zombies maps from previous games : " Nacht Der Untoten " , " Verrückt " , and " Shi no Numa " from World at War , " Kino Der Toten " , " Ascension " , " Shangri - La " , and " Moon " from Black Ops , and " Origins " from Black Ops II , and is not included in the season pass of the game .
The map pack was released on May 16 , 2017 for PlayStation 4 , and June 16 for Xbox One and PC .
On May 24 , 2017 , Activision and Treyarch announced a Multiplayer DLC Trial Pack for the PC version of Black Ops III , allowing all players to play on all multiplayer maps from the four map packs for free for a limited time , while also offering XP bonuses to players who previously owned the map packs and/or the season pass .
On March 20 , 2018 , the Zombies maps from the four map packs were made available for separate purchase on PlayStation 4 and Xbox One , with PC to follow on May 2 .
On June 11 , 2018 , Activision and Treyarch announced the " Back in Black " map pack , which contains four remastered versions of fan - favorite multiplayer maps from Black Ops and Black Ops II : " Summit " , " Jungle " , " Firing Range " , and " Slums " .
These four maps , which are also included in at launch , are offered first to PlayStation 4 for players who pre - order Black Ops 4 on the aforementioned platform .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
According to review aggregator Metacritic , Call of Duty : Black Ops III received " generally favorable " critic reviews for PlayStation 4 and Xbox One , and " mixed or average " critic reviews for PC .
GameSpot awarded it a score of 7 out of 10 , saying , " Black Ops III does n't offer anything remarkable to the series , but does just enough to maintain the Call of Duty status quo .
The franchise , however slowly , continues its inexorable march . "
Polygon also gave the game a score of 7 out of 10 , saying " Black Ops IIIs biggest point of recommendation may be the breadth of content there , and that 's a valid point of view .
But Treyarch does n't meaningfully move the series forward here .
" IGN awarded it a score of 9.2 out of 10 , saying " With fun 4-player co - op , new powers , and a fleshed out Zombies mode , Black Ops 3 is the biggest Call of Duty game yet . " Despite earning positive reviews , there were some criticism .
The campaign was heavily criticized for its story and the absence of fan favourite story mode characters .
Stuart Andrews of Trusted Reviews stated in his review : " The only problem is that , as with all all - you - can - eat buffets , some portions are a lot tastier than others , leaving you wondering whether a little more focus might have created something really exceptional .
Black Ops 3 is a solid installment that will please the series ' hardcore fans , but it 's not a mainstream crowd - pleaser in the way that last year 's Advanced Warfare was .
In a way , it suffers because of Call of Duty : Advanced Warfare .
The first Black Ops bought a very distinctive flavour to Call of Duty ; one born of conspiracy theory , spy thrillers and darker style of storytelling .
The second mixed that up with a sci - fi techno - thriller , splitting the action between interleaved , branching past and near - future storylines and bringing bots and drones into the mix .
Black Ops 3s focuses entirely on the sci - fi stuff , loses most of its conspiracy theory trappings and brings augmented super - soldiers in .
The result sometimes feels less like a third Black Ops game than Call of Duty : Even More Advanced Warfare .
It leaves you wondering whether it 's time Call of Duty looked back to the past for inspiration . "
SALES Section::::Sales .
Black Ops III sold over 6.6 million copies in its first week of sales and grossed over $ 550 million in sales during its first three days of release .
In the United Kingdom , the game bested to become the top selling game .
Black Ops III was the top best selling game in the US according to NPD 's figures .
Black Ops III later became the top selling game of 2015 .
According to Activision , Black Ops III was one of the best - selling games released for the eighth generation of video game consoles , and that its financial performance is significantly better than its predecessor , .
AWARDS
REFERENCES Notes Footnotes EXTERNAL LINKS