LEGENDS OF TOMORROW DC 's Legends of Tomorrow , or simply Legends of Tomorrow , is an American superhero television series developed by Greg Berlanti , Marc Guggenheim , Andrew Kreisberg , and Phil Klemmer , who are also executive producers along with Sarah Schechter and Chris Fedak ; Klemmer and Fedak serve as showrunners .
The series , based on the characters of DC Comics , airs on The CW and is a spin - off featuring characters introduced in Arrow and The Flash along with new characters , set in the Arrowverse , the same fictional universe .
The series premiered in January 2016 .
Legends of Tomorrow has been renewed for a fourth season which premiered on October 22 , 2018 .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
Time Master Rip Hunter goes rogue after Vandal Savage murders Hunter 's family .
Intending to stop Savage , Hunter recruits a team consisting of Ray Palmer / Atom , Sara Lance / White Canary , Martin Stein and Jefferson " Jax " Jackson , who combine to form the hero Firestorm , Kendra Saunders / Hawkgirl , Carter Hall / Hawkman , Leonard Snart / Captain Cold , and Mick Rory / Heat Wave .
They discover that the Time Masters are backing Savage in his domination of the world in 2166 to facilitate a successful repulsion of a Thanagarian invasion .
Due to Snart 's sacrifice , the Time Masters are destroyed .
In season two , with the Time Masters defeated , the team guard the timeline themselves , and cope with Rip 's absence after he disappears .
However , they are plagued by the Legion of Doom , a time - travelling team led by Reverse Flash ( Eobard Thawne ) , who has recruited versions of Damien Darhk , Malcolm Merlyn , and Leonard Snart to find the Biblical Spear of Destiny , with which they can alter their fates .
The team is joined by Amaya Jiwe / Vixen , an African superhero from the Justice Society of America , and Nate Heywood / Steel , a modern - day historian who acquires the power to become solid metal and revert to normal skin .
In season three , the team discover that they created anachronisms throughout time , and Rip has formed the Time Bureau to help fix them .
Rip tells the team of the demon Mallus , whose follower Nora Darhk has resurrected her father Damien and Amaya 's granddaughter Kuasa , also recruiting Gorilla Grodd so that they can release Mallus from his prison by perverting history .
The team loses both members of Firestorm , but is joined by Zari Tomaz , a hacktivist from 2042 whose air - controlling amulet is connected to Amaya 's totem , and Wally West / Kid Flash , a speedster formerly under the tutelage of the Flash .
In season four , occult detective John Constantine joins the team to help them hunt down magical fugitives that have been scattered throughout the timeline following the team 's battle with Mallus .
CAST AND CHARACTERS
* Victor Garber as Martin Stein / Firestorm :
* Brandon Routh as Ray Palmer / Atom : ( season 1–present )
* Arthur Darvill as Rip Hunter :
* Caity Lotz as Sara Lance / White Canary : ( season 1–present ) .
* Franz Drameh as Jefferson
" Jax " Jackson / Firestorm : * Ciara Renée as Kendra Saunders
/ Hawkgirl : The character was first introduced on The Flash .
( season 1 )
* Falk Hentschel as Carter Hall / Hawkman :
*
Amy Pemberton ( credited as Amy Louise Pemberton since season 3 ) voices
Gideon : * Dominic Purcell as Mick Rory
/ Heat Wave : * Wentworth Miller as Leonard Snart / Captain Cold : * Matt Letscher as Eobard Thawne / Reverse Flash : * Maisie Richardson - Sellers as Amaya Jiwe / Vixen and Charlie : At the end of season 3 , she returns to Zambesi .
Lookalike Charlie is introduced in season 4 as a " magical fugitive who slips through " the rift the Waverider crew opened .
She is a shapeshifter who takes the form of Amaya during a fight with the Legends in the hopes that they will not attack a friend .
She is frozen into that shape during the encounter and captured by the Legends .
She no longer has magical powers , but is a formidable fighter and knows a great deal about the other magical fugitives .
( season 2–present ) .
* Nick Zano as Nate Heywood / Steel :
* Tala Ashe as Zari Tomaz : * Keiynan Lonsdale as Wally West / Kid Flash :
* Jes Macallan as Ava Sharpe : the Director of the Time Bureau and love interest of Sara Lance .
( recurring season 3 , main season 4 ) * Matt Ryan as John Constantine : Ryan is listed among the main cast yet credited as special appearance .
Ryan was announced as being promoted to a series regular for the fourth season ahead of its renewal , reprising his role as Constantine , an English magician / warlock , occult detective , and con man from the short - lived series Constantine .
( recurring season 3 , main season 4 ) .
* Courtney Ford as Nora Darhk : the daughter of the dead super - villain Damien Darhk .
( recurring season 3 , main season 4 ) * Ramona Young as Mona Wu : a young girl obsessed with fantasy novels who is " something of an expert in the world of the magical creatures that the Legends encounter . " ( season 4 ) .
She works for the time bureau .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
In January 2015 , co - creator Greg Berlanti stated that there were " very early " preliminary talks for an additional spin - off series centered on Ray Palmer / Atom ( Brandon Routh ) , from Arrow and The Flash .
In February 2015 , it was reported that a spin - off series , described as a superhero team - up show , was in discussion by The CW for a possible 2015–16 midseason release .
Berlanti , Andrew Kreisberg , Marc Guggenheim , and Sarah Schechter would serve as executive producers .
The potential series would be headlined by several recurring characters from both Arrow and The Flash , including Palmer , Leonard Snart ( Wentworth Miller ) , and Dr. Martin Stein ( Victor Garber ) .
Caity Lotz was also mentioned to be among the main cast .
There would be potential for other Arrow / Flash characters to cross over to the new series , and the series would be casting " three major DC Comics characters who have never appeared in a TV series " .
In March 2015 , Stephen Amell , who portrays Oliver Queen / Green Arrow on Arrow , confirmed the series would air in the 2015–16 midseason .
Additionally , Kreisberg stated more would be revealed about the nature of the series by the end of Arrows third season , specifically why Lotz is slated to appear , given her previous character , Sara , was killed at the start of Arrow season three .
Berlanti also stated there was a particular reason for the other half of Firestorm — Ronnie Raymond ( Robbie Amell ) , as seen on The Flash — not being mentioned in the initial cast announcement .
On the purpose of the series , Berlanti said it was designed to be " most similar to our crossover episodes , where you feel that ' event - iness ' , but all the time .
For us , first and foremost , with all of [ our shows ] , it 's about ' how is it its own thing ? '
Because we do n't just want to do it to do it . "
He also revealed the producers were focusing on " making sure that the villain that we have on [ the ] show is distinct too ...
another big character who has n't been used yet . "
Also in March , Dominic Purcell was revealed to be reprising his role as Heat Wave in the series , and Blake Neely , composer of Arrow and The Flash , would serve as composer .
At the end of the month , Arthur Darvill was cast as Rip Hunter , one of the " new to TV " DC characters , while Ciara Renée was cast as Kendra Saunders / Hawkgirl .
In April 2015 , in a Variety article on the recent MipTV event , it noted the title for the series would be Legends of Tomorrow , despite it still being unconfirmed by those involved with the series .
Also in the month , Franz Drameh was cast as Jax Jackson .
In May 2015 , actor Victor Garber said that The CW was impressed with what was shown to them , giving the project a straight - to - series order .
The network officially confirmed the order for the series on May 7 , 2015 , as well as the official title , DC 's Legends of Tomorrow .
Later in the month , it was confirmed that Lotz would reprise her role as Sara Lance , who would be taking the name White Canary , as well as revealing the antagonist as Vandal Savage .
In June 2015 , it was announced that Phil Klemmer had been made the series showrunner as well as executive producer ; Chris Fedak serves as executive producer and co - showrunner with Klemmer .
At the end of the month , Grant Gustin stated he would appear in the series as Barry Allen / Flash , though he ultimately did not appear in the first season .
In August 2015 , Casper Crump was cast as Vandal Savage .
On March 11 , 2016 , the series was renewed for a second season , which debuted in October 2016 .
The producers have considered adjusting the Legends team for additional seasons , with Joseph David - Jones ' Connor Hawke and Megalyn Echikunwoke 's Vixen potential additions .
For the second season , Klemmer revealed that Arrow writer Keto Shimizu and The Flash writer Grainne Godfree would be working on Legends in order to " make our stories work in concert " with Arrow and The Flash .
Klemmer also noted the challenges of creating more crossover elements , since Amell and Gustin work full days for their respective shows .
In terms of working within the Arrowverse , Klemmer said that the death of Laurel Lance on Arrow would " resonate into Season 2 ...
[ since ] something that happens on Arrow can create ripples that appear on our show in a huge way .
It fundamentally alters the DNA of our series .
" The second season initially consisted of 13 episodes , with four more ordered in November 2016 to bring the season total to 17 .
Teasing the premise of season two in April 2016 , Klemmer stated , " We 're coming at it from a completely different angle .
We 're determined to make every part of season two feel like its own show .
[ The first episode of season two ] will very much be a new pilot with new good guys , new bad guys , new stakes , new dynamics , new goals .
The team will basically have to find a new purpose .
Once you save the world , what do you do then ? ...
The fact that the world was in peril sort of forced our team to fall into its own dysfunctional version of lockstep .
Season two , they 're no longer going to be hunted by Time Masters .
They 're no longer going to be burdened with having to save the world .
It 's no longer going to be about saving Miranda and Jonas .
The interesting thing about season two is I think it 's going to have a much , much different tone because our Legends are going to have a totally different purpose .
They 're actually going to have a totally different constitution .
There will be new faces and new everything .
" The season also introduced members of the Justice Society of America .
The Society consisted of Hourman , Vixen , Commander Steel , Obsidian , Stargirl and Dr. Mid - Nite .
The season also featured a version of the Legion of Doom , composed of the Reverse - Flash , Malcolm Merlyn , Damien Darhk and Captain Cold .
FILMING Section::::Filming .
In May 2015 , Garber revealed filming would begin in August 2015 , for a January 2016 premiere .
The series shot a presentation for the network 's upfront showcase , which was filmed over the course of one night , and directed by Arrow and The Flash veteran Dermott Downs .
Filming of the series began on September 9 , 2015 , in Vancouver , British Columbia .
Director / producer Glen Winter discussed in a January 2016 interview with Comic Book Resources the process of filming key elements of the series ' pilot , The new facet for Legends was that there 's no # 1 [ actor ] on the call sheet .
There are seven or eight leads .
For me , that was the intimidating part .
I was n't as worried about the action and tone as I was with wrangling all these personalities and finding out how they all work together .
Or , how to shoot a scene with eight people in the Waverider , day after day .
He stated of the series style of shooting on location as opposed to predominantly shooting on a soundstage , As is typical with any pilot , most of the time you are going to shoot more on location .
Because you do n't necessarily know if you are going to have a show that 's been picked up , they do n't want to invest a lot of money in the infrastructure , so you end up shooting more on location .
The only set that was built was the Waverider .
That being said , because we knew there was a pickup for the show , it was n't a conventional pilot .
All the resources of construction went into the Waverider .
That 's continuing into the series .
I do n't think they tend to build much .
I think they tend to adapt locations because there 's so much time travel
and so many eras to create .
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
Legends of Tomorrow premiered in the United States on January 21 , 2016 , and the first season consisted of sixteen episodes .
The series premiere in Australia was originally announced as January 20 , 2016 , however it was pushed back until January 22 .
It started airing in the United Kingdom on March 3 , 2016 .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
The pilot was well reviewed for its potential .
Russ Burlingame from ComicBook.com praised it saying , " The series delivers a sharp , enjoyable pilot that 's arguably the most attention - grabbing and entertaining from any of the current crop of superhero shows .
"
Jesse Schedeen of IGN gave the first part of the pilot episode a 7.7/10 , praising the show 's " epic scope " , " fun character dynamics " , and Arthur Darvill 's performance ; and gave the second part of the pilot a 8.4/10 , saying it " improved in its sophomore episode thanks to great character dynamics and superhero action " .
However , review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gave the complete first season only a 57 % approval rating , with an average rating of 6.05/10 based on 37 reviews .
The website 's consensus reads : "
Fancy effects , comic - book nostalgia , and an alluring cast help keep it afloat , but DC 's Legends of Tomorrow suffers from an overloaded cast of characters that contribute to a distractingly crowded canvas .
"
Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned a score of 58 out of 100 based on reviews from 22 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Rotten Tomatoes gave the second season a 77 % approval rating , with an average rating of
6.06/10 based on 13 reviews .
The website 's consensus reads : " Though the narrative remains too ambitious , DC 's Legends of Tomorrow enjoys a freer creative arc with the removal of problem characters . "
The third season holds an approval rating of 88 % on Rotten Tomatoes , with an average rating of 7.98/10 based on 11 reviews .
while IGN gave the season an approval rating of 8.1 /10 , stating : " When Legends of Tomorrow works , it 's easily among the best superhero shows on television ( if not shows in general ) .
Unfortunately , while Season 3 reached some impressive highs , it also gave us some of the weakest installments of the series .
Season 3 ultimately suffered from its inability to create a conflict worthy of this cast of misfit heroes , and that casts a shadow that will linger when the series returns for Season 4 . "
RATINGS AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
! scope="col " Year ! scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Category ! scope="col " Recipient(s ) ! scope="col " Result ! scope="col " class="unsortable " HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
!
rowspan="2
" width="4 % " Complete Season !
colspan="3 " width="22 % " DVD / Blu - ray Release dates !
rowspan="2 " width="20 % " Additional features !
Region 1 /
A !
Region 2 / B !
Region 4
/ C !
1
* DC 's Legends of Tomorrow : 2015 Comic - Con Panel
*
The Wave Rider
* Legends of Tomorrow : History In The Making
* Hex Marks
The Spot * Deleted Scenes *
Gag Reel !
2
* DC 's Legends of Tomorrow : 2016 Comic - Con Panel *
Allied :
The Invasion Complex ( DC 's Legends of Tomorrow )
* Deleted Scenes
* Gag - Reel !
3
* All four episodes of the Crisis on Earth - X crossover
*
The Best of DC TV 's Comic - Con Panels San Diego 2017 * Inside the Crossover : Crisis on
Earth - X * Gag Reel
ARROWVERSE
Section::::Arrowverse .
In May 2015 , Renée made a cameo in the final episode of The Flashs first season , " Fast Enough " , and later made appearances in the show 's second season in November 2015 .
In July 2015 , Guggenheim revealed that the resurrection of Sara Lance would be launched in the first few episodes of Arrows fourth season , with the events of the eighth episodes of Arrow and The Flash — which were a crossover event — being used to set up the other characters of Legends of Tomorrow .
Franz Drameh was introduced as the new other half of Firestorm in the fourth episode of the second season of The Flash .
Crump , Hentschel and James debut in the crossover episodes for the second season of The Flash and the fourth season of Arrow .
In November 2016 , the cast of Legends of Tomorrow appeared on The Flash and Arrow as part of the three - part " Invasion ! "
crossover event ; the crossover episodes also featured appearances by Melissa Benoist , reprising her role as Kara Danvers / Supergirl from the TV series Supergirl .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS