SCHOOL OF ROCK ( TV SERIES ) School of Rock is an American musical - comedy television series developed by Jim Armogida and Steve Armogida that aired on Nickelodeon from March 12 , 2016 to April 8 , 2018 .
The series is based on the 2003 film of the same name and stars Breanna Yde , Ricardo Hurtado , Jade Pettyjohn , Lance Lim , Aidan Miner , Tony Cavalero , and Jama Williamson .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Set in Austin , Texas , the series follows a group of rule - abiding students who learn to take risks and reach new heights thanks to substitute teacher Dewey Finn , a down - on - his - luck musician who uses the language of rock and roll to inspire his class to form a secret band .
Throughout the school year , these middle - school classmates find themselves navigating relationships , discovering their unknown talents and learning lessons on loyalty and friendships .
EPISODES
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* Breanna Yde as Tomika , a 12-year - old schoolgirl who is best friends with classmate Summer .
She plays the electric bass and is also the lead singer in the band .
* Ricardo Hurtado as Freddy , a 12-year - old schoolboy who is considered the most handsome guy in his class and plays the drums in the band .
His best friends are classmates Zack and Lawrence .
Unbeknownst to him , Summer has a huge crush on him .
At the end of the second season , he begins to have feelings for her .
* Jade Pettyjohn as Summer , a 12-year - old schoolgirl who is best friends with Tomika and plays the tambourine in the band and also is the manager .
She has a crush on Freddy .
* Lance Lim as Zack , a 12-year - old schoolboy who is best friends with Lawrence and Freddy .
He plays the electric guitar .
* Aidan Miner as Lawrence , a 12-year - old schoolboy who is best friends with Zack and Freddy and is considered the smartest kid in his class .
He plays the electronic keyboard .
* Tony Cavalero as Mr. Finn , the new substitute teacher and an ex - rock musician who teaches the kids how to play and work together as a band .
In the second season , he is promoted to a regular teacher .
* Jama Williamson as Principal Mullins , the principal of the school .
In the first season , she is a recurring character , but is promoted to a main character in the second season .
RECURRING
* Ivan Mallon as Clark * Brec Bassinger as Kale ( seasons 2–3 )
* Will Kindrachuk as Asher ( seasons 2–3 )
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In August 2014 , Nickelodeon announced a TV series adaptation of School of Rock , and the cast was revealed in March 2015 .
On April 5 , 2016 , Nickelodeon announced that School of Rock had been renewed for a 13-episode second season , and actress Breanna Yde announced on her Twitter account that production of season two began April 24 , 2016 .
In April 2016 , Jama Williamson was promoted to the regular cast for the series ' second season .
The second season premiered on Nickelodeon on September 17 , 2016 .
Nickelodeon renewed the series for a 20-episode third season on December 2 , 2016 .
The third season premiered on July 8 , 2017 .
On November 15 , 2017 , Nickelodeon announced that the third season would be the last .
Tony Cavalero reported on social media that the series finale was airing on April 8 , 2018 .
The last episode of the third season as well as the series aired on April 8 , 2018 .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
On June 25 , 2018 , it was announced that School of Rock will stream on Hulu .
RATINGS AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Result REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS