BANANA PRODUCTION IN THE UNITED STATES Commercial banana production in the United States is relatively limited in scale and economic impact .
While Americans eat of bananas per person per year , the vast majority of the fruit is imported from other countries , chiefly Central and South America , where the US has previously occupied areas containing banana plantations , and controlled the importation of bananas via various fruit companies , such as Dole and Chiquita .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The first commercial banana farm in the United States was established in Florida , near Silver Lake , in 1876 .
A number of independent banana farms and cultivars have been located in a number of areas , reaching as far north as the southern Midwest and Ohio river , where wild banana trees can be found along the banks of the Ohio at far southern Illinois , Indiana , and Missouri , just north of Kentucky .
This region equates roughly with the northernmost terminus of the subtropical crop - growing region of the US , which ends at about Cincinnati , Ohio , and further east in cities and locations such as Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , New York City and Long Island in New York , and coastal regions of southern New England .
Banana growth further west along this ecological transition line , such as in central to northern Missouri and northern Kansas
/ far southern Nebraska is highly dubious and uncertain , due to extreme temperature fluctuations and an increase in aridity .
Other states that have been popular locations for independent banana farming have been Georgia , Louisiana , South Carolina , Mississippi , Arkansas , Texas , Oklahoma , Alabama , North Carolina , Hawaii , Virginia , Arizona , California , Nevada , and Maryland .
Florida has seen a number of independent and big - name banana cultivars inhabit its land throughout history .
Bananas have also been cultivated in states of the Pacific Northwest , including in areas of Washington , Oregon , and various highland areas and sheltered oceanic / temperate valleys in southern Idaho .
In the 70 's , a variety of bananas , including Ice Cream and Cavendish , were commonly grown throughout the Appalachian region , primarily throughout Tennessee , as well as in Kentucky along the Mississippi and Ohio rivers as well as in mountain areas of the eastern reaches of the state .
CURRENT PRODUCTION
Section::::Current production .
Hawaii is by far the largest banana producer in the United States , followed by Florida .
Banana plantation in Hawaii has followed a descending trend , from 13,181 mmt in 2000 to 8,090 mmt in 2010 .
Hawaii produces mainly the conventional Cavendish assortment and the Hawaiian apple banana , which are sold in the local markets due to high employment and land expenses .
The chief US banana exporter is Florida , which produces mostly Thai and cooking bananas ( Bluggoe type ) .
In addition , US banana producers are looking for opportunities in the organic and specialty segments of the banana market in Florida , Texas , California , Mississippi , Alabama , South Carolina , and Georgia .
Banana cultivation in Florida has been about 500 acres , valued at roughly 2 million US $ .
Other states that remain popular locations for independent banana farming , which usually only export on a highly domestic level , are Georgia , Louisiana , Mississippi , Arkansas , Texas , Oklahoma , Alabama , South Carolina , North Carolina , Virginia , Arizona , California , Nevada , and Maryland .
These states produce a variety depending on the region , including Cavendish , Bluggoe , Ice Cream , Goldfinger , Lady Finger , Red Dacca , Latundan , Pisano Awak , and Balbisinia subtypes .
Independent banana cultivation in the United States is diverse , with some areas of the country able to sustain fields of a wide variety of banana trees perennially or near - perennially , similar to a plantation system .
This is most notable ( outside of Florida and Hawaii ) in Texas , Louisiana , California , Arizona , Mississippi , Georgia , Alabama , South Carolina , and coastal North Carolina .
In other areas of the country ( northern Arkansas , southern Missouri , mountain Tennessee , southern Kansas , the far southern Midwest and along the Ohio river , Kentucky , and Virginia , ) containing a climate similar to that of the banana growing region of inland south - central and eastern China ( Sichuan , Anhui , Zhejiang , Hubei , Jiangsu , Henan , Jiangxi , Hunan , Chongqing , and Guizhou provinces , ) banana cultivation is more seasonal .
If independent cultivation was counted towards a nations total of banana production , its estimated that the United States would rank at about the 4th or 5th country for banana production in the world .
Bananas are also grown commercially in Puerto Rico , Guam , and American Samoa .
SEE ALSO Section::::See also .
Banana#Modern cultivation REFERENCES