WINNIE HARLOW Winnie Harlow ( born Chantelle Brown - Young ; July 27 , 1994 ) is a Canadian fashion model and public spokesperson on the skin condition vitiligo .
She gained prominence as a contestant on the twenty - first cycle of the U.S. television series America 's Next Top Model due to her condition .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Winnie Harlow was born Chantelle Brown - Young on July 27 , 1994 , in Toronto , Ontario , the daughter of Lisa Brown and Windsor Young .
She is of Jamaican ancestry and has two sisters .
She was diagnosed with the chronic skin condition vitiligo , characterized by depigmentation of portions of the skin , at the age of four .
Harlow was a victim of bullying by other children and was reportedly called a " cow , zebra , and all manner of other disparaging slurs " throughout her childhood by students both black and white .
The verbal harassment led to her changing schools numerous times and dropping out of high school , after which she contemplated committing suicide .
CAREER
MODELING
Section::::Career .
Section::::Modeling .
Harlow was discovered by America 's Next Top Model host Tyra Banks on Instagram , and subsequently became one of the fourteen finalists of the twenty - first cycle in 2014 .
She was the first and only Canadian ever cast on ANTM .
She was eliminated in the second week of the finals , and participated in a separate competition called the " comeback series " , where she continued to participate in the cycle 's photo shoots along with the other eliminated contestants in an effort to return to the competition .
After completing the comeback series , she was revealed to have received the highest average public vote score , and returned .
She was eliminated again in episode 13 , placing sixth overall .
Following her elimination from America 's Next Top Model , Harlow modelled for the Spanish clothing brand Desigual and became their official brand representative .
In September 2014 , she walked and closed for the clothing brand Ashish for their spring / summer 2015 collection in London Fashion Week .
She has modelled for fashion magazines such as i - D and Dazed , and for the fashion website Showstudio.com .
In 2015 , Harlow modelled for the Italian clothing brand Diesel for its spring / summer 2015 campaign , which was shot by
British fashion photographer Nick Knight .
She modelled for the Spanish and Italian editions of Glamour magazine and was featured in the August / September 2015 issue of Complex magazine .
She was also featured in the August 2015 issue of Cosmopolitan .
She was featured on Vogue Italias website in an interview and accompanying photo shoot .
In August 2015 , Harlow shot the cover of and an accompanying editorial spread in the September issue of Ebony magazine , where she appeared alongside former America 's Next Top Model contestant Fatima Siad .
In 2016 , Harlow was featured in a commercial for Sprite , and was featured in a campaign for Swarovski .
The same year , she was chosen as one of BBC 's 100 Women VITILIGO PUBLIC SPEAKING
Section::::Vitiligo public speaking .
In July 2011 , Harlow posted a video titled " Vitiligo : A Skin Condition , not a Life Changer " on YouTube .
She talked about the condition and answered questions about her life living with vitiligo .
In November 2014 , Harlow spoke in a TED presentation , recalling her experience with it .
In October 2015 , Harlow spoke at the Dove Campaign for Real Beauty panel at the 2015 Women in the World Foundation Summit .
She was presented with the ' Role Model ' award at the 2015 Portuguese GQ Men of The Year event .
2018
CANADIAN GRAND PRIX Section::::2018 Canadian Grand Prix .
At the 2018 Canadian Grand Prix , Harlow was invited to wave the chequered flag , signifying the end of the race .
A miscommunication between race officials led to Harlow being instructed to wave the flag on what should have been the penultimate lap of the race .
As a result of the application of the Formula One sporting regulations , the final result was declared based on the positions at the end of lap 68 ( i.e. , the official race distance was shortened by two laps from the scheduled distance of 70 laps ) .
The error did not seriously impact the race result .
OTHER WORK
Section::::Other work .
Harlow has appeared in music videos ; these including JMSN 's " The One " , Eminem 's " Guts Over Fear " , and The Black Eyed Peas ' " # WHERESTHELOVE " .
She cameoed in Beyoncé 's " visual album
" Lemonade and was in one of Lilly Singh ( a.k.a . IISuperwomanII ) 's videos on YouTube named " Three Girls , One Elevator " .
FILMOGRAPHY
TELEVISION
Section::::Filmography .
Section::::Television . !
Year !
Title ! class="unsortable
" Notes MUSIC VIDEOS Section::::Music videos . !
Song !
Year !
Artist !
Reference(s )
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Year !
Organization !
Award !
Work !
Result REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Winnie Harlow website