MARRIED AT FIRST SIGHT ( U.S. TV SERIES )
Married at First Sight is an American reality television series based on a Danish series of the same name titled Gift Ved Første Blik .
The series first aired in the United States on FYI .
Beginning with season two , it aired in simulcast on sister network
A&E.
The series features three couples , paired up by relationship experts , who agree to marry when they first meet .
For the first three seasons , the experts were clinical psychologist Dr. Joseph Cilona , sexologist Dr. Logan Levkoff , sociologist Dr. Pepper Schwartz , and humanist chaplain Greg Epstein .
Starting with the fourth season , the experts are Schwartz , pastor and marriage counselor Calvin Roberson , and communication and relationship expert Rachel DeAlto .
The couples spend their wedding night in a hotel before leaving for a honeymoon .
Upon returning home , they live together as a married couple for eight weeks .
Thereafter they choose to divorce or stay married .
On October 25 , 2016 FYI renewed the show for a fifth season .
In 2017 , for the fifth season , the show moved to the Lifetime channel .
The following year , two spinoffs were announced to premiere that October , Married at First Sight : Honeymoon Island and Married at First Sight :
Happily Ever After .
SYNOPSIS
Section::::Synopsis .
Over the first seven seasons of MAFS , 21 couples were chosen for the experiment .
Out of these 21 , fifteen chose to stay married after the six to eight week time period .
As of October 2018 , however , only five couples are still married , making for an overall 23.81 % success rate of the experiment .
SEASON 1
Section::::Season 1 .
The couples were : !
# !
Couple !
Age !
Occupation !
Final Decision !
Current status !
rowspan="2 " 1 Jamie Otis - Hehner SEASON 2 SEASON 3 SEASON 4 SEASON 5 Section::::Season 5 .
The fifth season of Married at First Sight was renewed on October 25 , 2016 .
For this season , the show moved to the Lifetime SEASON 6 Section::::Season 6 .
The sixth season of Married at First Sight was renewed on the Lifetime SEASON 7 Section::::Season 7 .
The seventh season of Married at First Sight has been renewed on the Lifetime SEASON 8 Section::::Season 8 .
The eighth season of Married at First Sight will feature couples from Philadelphia and will premiere January 1 , 2019 .
SEASON 9
Section::::Season 9 .
The ninth season of Married at First Sight will feature couples from Charlotte .
SPINOFFS Section::::Spinoffs .
Married at First Sight has so far had five spinoffs : * Married at First Sight :
The First Year * Married at First Sight : Second Chances * Jamie and Doug Plus One * Married at First Sight :
Honeymoon Island * Married at First Sight : Happily Ever After MARRIED AT FIRST SIGHT : THE FIRST YEAR
Section::::Married at First Sight : The First Year .
" Married at First Sight : The First Year " follows the lives of the two Season 1 couples remain married from the six - month mark to the one - year anniversary and beyond .
The couples are Jamie Otis - Hehner and Doug Hehner , and Cortney Hendrix - Carrion and Jason Carrion , with the first episode premiered on January 13 , 2015 .
A total of two seasons have been shown for this spinoff .
MARRIED AT FIRST SIGHT :
SECOND CHANCES
Section::::Married at First Sight : Second Chances .
Two participants from Season 3 , Vanessa Nelson and David Norton both took part in the first season of the second spinoff " Married at First Sight :
Second Chances " .
The show 's premise is that both David and Vanessa selected from a group of men ( for Nelson ) and women ( for Norton ) to date in a Bachelor / Bachelorette - style fashion , ultimately ending with each of them choosing someone to marry .
The groups were narrowed down from 100 ( in a speed dating - like situation ) to 25 , to 10 .
After Vanessa and David each picked their top ten , they eliminated one person each episode ( with the exception of one week 's double elimination ) until they find ' the one ' .
The first season premiered on April 27 , 2017 .
The season concluded on July 6 , 2017 with Vanessa becoming engaged to Andre , however they ended their relationship and David choosing to marry no one .
JAMIE AND DOUG
PLUS
ONE Section::::Jamie and Doug
Plus One .
" Jamie and Doug Plus One " continues to follow the lives of Jamie Otis - Hehner and Doug Hehner from the time right before the birth of their daughter Henley , through the first months of new parenthood .
The series shows the couple 's struggles with caring for their newborn while trying to maintain intimacy in their marriage .
MARRIED AT FIRST SIGHT :
HONEYMOON ISLAND
MARRIED
AT FIRST SIGHT :
HAPPILY EVER
AFTER Section::::Married at First Sight : Happily Ever After .
The fifth spinoff " Married at First Sight : Happily Ever After " follows the lives of couples from previous seasons who still remain married and are expecting children , including Ashley Petta and Anthony D'Amico from Season 5 , Shawniece Jackson and Jephte Pierre from Season 6 , and Danielle Bergman and Bobby Dodd from season 7 .
The first episode premieres on Oct. 30 , 2018 .
INTERNATIONAL VERSIONS VTM
2016 - present
Married at First Sight SA
Lifetime 2016 - present
Married at
First Sight RTL4 2016 - present Casamento à
Primeira Vista
A&ELifetime
2015 - present Antena 3 2015 - 2018
EXTERNAL LINKS REFERENCES