TEAR IN MY HEART
" Tear in My Heart " is a song written and recorded by American musical duo Twenty One Pilots , for their fourth studio album Blurryface .
The song was released as a single on April 6 , 2015 and was released to radio on April 14 of the same year .
MUSIC VIDEO Section::::Music video .
A music video for " Tear in My Heart " was uploaded to YouTube on April 6 , 2015 and was directed by Marc Klasfeld .
In addition to both band members , lead singer Tyler Joseph 's wife Jenna , who he married the previous month , also appears in the music video .
The music video for " Tear in My Heart " shows Joseph and Dun performing in Chinatown , Los Angeles , with Joseph singing in the town square .
The people do n't notice them while Joseph sings the first verse of the song .
As more people begin to notice them , their eyes distort .
The buildings surrounding Joseph and Dun begin to crumble , as Joseph notices his wife in the group of people ; he then proceeds to follow her down an alley and into a restaurant .
Jenna sings the lyrics " sometimes you 've got to bleed and know / that you 're alive and have a soul " .
Joseph then sings the following line , " but it takes someone to come around / to show you how " .
Jenna starts choking , punching , kicking , and beating Joseph until he is bleeding .
Jenna then holds his chin and they kiss .
LIVE PERFORMANCES Section::::Live performances .
Twenty One Pilots performed a remix of Tear in My Heart by DJ SoySauce at their Emotional Roadshow concert in Cincinnati , Ohio , in the form of a drum line which consisted of Dun and two other men in hazmat suits beside him .
This was continued to be done throughout the tour .
TRACK LISTING PERSONNEL * Tyler Joseph – vocals , piano , programming , guitar , synthesizers
*
Josh Dun – drums , percussion , backing vocals Additional musicians
* Ricky Reed – bass guitar ,
programming CHARTS WEEKLY CHARTS Section::::Charts .
Section::::Weekly charts . !
Chart ( 2015–16 ) !
Peakposition !
scope="row " Australia ( ARIA ) YEAR - END CHARTS CERTIFICATIONS RELEASE HISTORY Section::::Release history . !
Region !
Date !
Format !
Label ! scope="row " Worldwide REFERENCES