MAZE RUNNER : THE DEATH CURE
Maze Runner :
The Death Cure ( also known simply as The Death Cure ) is a 2018 American dystopian science fiction action film directed by Wes Ball and written by T.S. Nowlin , based on the novel The Death Cure written by James Dashner .
It is the sequel to the 2015 film and the third and final installment in the Maze Runner film series .
The film stars Dylan O'Brien , Kaya Scodelario , Thomas Brodie - Sangster , Dexter Darden , Nathalie Emmanuel , Giancarlo Esposito , Aidan Gillen , Walton Goggins , Ki Hong Lee , Jacob Lofland , Katherine McNamara , Barry Pepper , Will Poulter , Rosa Salazar , and Patricia Clarkson .
Maze Runner :
The Death Cure was originally set to be released on February 17 , 2017 , in the United States by 20th Century Fox , but the studio rescheduled the film 's release for January 26 , 2018 , in theatres and IMAX , allowing time for O'Brien to recover from injuries he sustained during filming .
The film received mixed reviews from critics and grossed over $ 288 million worldwide .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Thomas , Newt , and Frypan are the last of the free " Gladers " immune to the Flare virus that has ravaged the world 's population .
They and The Right Arm resistance conduct a rescue operation where they retrieve other Immunes from a train , which is owned by WCKD , an organization responsible for capturing and experimenting on immune children .
They discover that Minho , their remaining Glader friend whom WCKD had captured , was not on that train , which is headed to " The Last City " , WCKD 's base of operations .
Against the orders of Vince , leader of The Right Arm , the three leave their camp to rescue Minho , who is being tortured by WCKD in hopes of developing a cure for the virus .
Heading for the Last City , the group is attacked by Cranks , humans infected with the Flare .
However , they are saved by Jorge and Brenda , who join them .
The group makes it to the wall of the Last City , which protects the city from Cranks .
Outside the wall , people are rallying in protest to be let into the city .
When WCKD opens fire at the protesters , the group is captured by a contingent of masked men and are taken to a hideout .
One of the masked men is revealed to be Gally , who survived Minho 's attack .
Gally takes them to see Lawrence , a rebellion leader for those outside the walls , who helps them enter the Last City through a secret entrance .
Gally leads Thomas and Newt through to the city and , spotting Teresa , Gally tells Thomas that he can get them into WCKD headquarters .
Newt then confides to Thomas that he is infected .
Promising to cure him , the three capture Teresa .
Thomas , Newt , and Gally escort Teresa inside WCKD headquarters and toward the location of the Immunes .
Gally looks after the Immune children and stays to find a serum that slows the Flare , while Thomas , Newt , and Teresa go to find Minho .
They are discovered and chased by Janson .
Teresa lets them escape to find Minho before rushing to do a blood test on Thomas ' blood , which she obtained when removing trackers from the Gladers .
Having delivered the Immune children and the serum to Brenda , Gally returns to WCKD headquarters to find Thomas .
Brenda is forced to flee with the Immune children to avoid capture .
Thomas and Newt reunite with Minho in the medical wing .
Teresa discovers that Thomas ' blood can cure the Flare .
She shares her discovery with WCKD 's leader , Ava Paige , both agreeing that they must find Thomas .
Brenda and the Immune children escape WCKD with Frypan 's help .
Meanwhile , Lawrence rallies his rebels outside the city before blowing a hole in the city wall , sacrificing himself to allow his allies and the infected people to storm the city .
Gally finds Thomas , Minho , and Newt .
Newt , sending Minho and Gally ahead to get the serum from Brenda , gives Thomas a pendant before passing out .
Teresa transmits her voice throughout the city , telling Thomas that his blood can save Newt if he will only return to WCKD .
Newt , nearly consumed by the Flare , regains consciousness and attacks Thomas , while begging Thomas to kill him .
When Thomas refuses , Newt – left with no other option – stabs himself .
Thomas makes his way back to WCKD and confronts Ava .
However , she is killed by Janson , who is infected by the Flare .
Janson knocks Thomas out and drags him to a lab where Teresa is ready to extract his blood .
However , he reveals that he is only truly interested in curing himself and others that he feels are worthy , which results in Teresa turning on him .
After a fight , Janson is killed by Cranks , allowing Thomas and Teresa to escape to the rooftop , where Teresa gives Thomas a vial with the cure .
Their allies suddenly appear in an aircraft : Thomas makes it aboard , but Teresa dies when the headquarters collapses in on itself .
The group reunites with the rest of the Immunes and The Right Arm , escaping to a safe haven , where the remaining population can live in safety .
There , Thomas discovers that the pendant Newt gave him had a note in it .
Still traumatized by his friends ' deaths , he reads the note , in which Newt tells him to look after everyone , before thanking Thomas for being his friend .
While standing on the beach and looking out towards the ocean , Thomas takes the vial of the cure out of his pocket and looks expectantly into the sunset .
CAST
* Dylan O'Brien as Thomas * Kaya Scodelario as Teresa * Thomas Brodie - Sangster as Newt
* Dexter Darden as Frypan * Nathalie Emmanuel as Harriet
* Giancarlo Esposito as Jorge * Aidan Gillen as Janson
* Walton Goggins as Lawrence
*
Ki Hong Lee as Minho
* Jacob Lofland as Aris
* Katherine McNamara as Sonya * Barry Pepper as Vince
* Will Poulter as Gally * Rosa Salazar as Brenda * Patricia Clarkson as Ava Paige PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In March 2015 , it was confirmed that T.S. Nowlin , who co - wrote the first and wrote the second film , would adapt Maze Runner : The Death Cure .
On September 16 , 2015 , it was confirmed that Ball would return to direct the final film .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography began on March 14 , 2016 , in Vancouver , British Columbia .
Previously it was revealed at San Diego Comic - Con International that filming would begin in February 2016 .
On March 18 , 2016 , it was reported that actor Dylan O'Brien was injured on set and was hospitalized .
James Dashner announced via Twitter that the production was postponed after the accident .
It was said that the producers were " looking to " resume filming around mid - May .
According to the Directors Guild of Canada 's production list , the film was scheduled to resume filming on May 9 , and complete principal photography on July 26 .
However , on April 29 , 2016 , production was shut down indefinitely as O'Brien 's injuries were more serious than previously thought .
Filming resumed on March 6 , 2017 in Cape Town , South Africa .
In May 2017 , it was announced that Walton Goggins would play the part of Lawrence , described as " an unusual and dangerous character who is part - revolutionary , part - anarchist , and a voice for the voiceless people .
"
Principal photography wrapped on June 3 , 2017 .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
It was originally scheduled to be released in the United States on February 17 , 2017 .
However , due to Dylan O'Brien 's injuries , the studio said that it was unlikely that this date was going to be met .
On May 27 , 2016 , 20th Century Fox rescheduled the film for January 12 , 2018 , allowing time for Dylan O'Brien to fully recover .
On April 22 , 2017 , the studio delayed the release date once again , to February 9 , 2018 , in order to allow more time for post - production ; months later , on August 25 , the studio moved the release forward two weeks .
The film premiered on January 26 , 2018 , in theatres and IMAX .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Maze Runner :
The Death Cure was released on Blu - Ray and DVD on April 24 , 2018 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Maze Runner : The Death Cure grossed $ 58million in the United States and Canada , and $ 230.1million in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 288.2million , against a production budget of $ 62million .
In the United States and Canada , The Death Cure was released alongside the wide expansion of Hostiles , and was expected to gross around $ 20 million from 3,786 theaters in its opening weekend .
The film made $ 1.5 million from Thursday night previews , in between the $ 1.1 million made by the first film and $ 1.7 million by the second , and $ 8.4 million on its first day .
It ended up opening to $ 24.2 million , down from the previous film but still finishing atop the box office .
In its second weekend the film dropped 57 % to $ 10.5 million , finishing second behind .
A week prior to its North American release , the film debuted in South Korea , Australia and Taiwan , grossing $ 15.1 million over its opening weekend .
During the first two weeks of international release , the film dominated the international box office taking $ 62.6 and $ 35.2 million respectively , and outpacing the two previous films .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 42 % based on 144 reviews , and an average rating of 5.1/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , "
Maze Runner :
The Death Cure may offer closure to fans of the franchise , but for anyone who has n't already been hooked , this bloated final installment is best left unseen . "
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 51 out of 100 , based on 37 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B+ " on an A+ to F scale .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
+ List of awards and nominations !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Nominee(s ) !
Result BreakTudo Awards
Choice Action Movie
Maze Runner :
The Death Cure REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS