THE GOOD WIFE ( SEASON 7 )
The seventh season of The Good Wife was ordered on May 11 , 2015 , by CBS .
It premiered on October 4 , 2015 , on CBS and consisted of 22 episodes .
A promotional advertisement for the series that aired during Super Bowl 50 announced that the seventh season would be its last .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
The series focuses on Alicia Florrick ( Margulies ) , whose husband Peter ( Noth ) , the former Cook County , Illinois State 's Attorney , has been jailed following a notorious political corruption and sex scandal .
After having spent the previous thirteen years as a stay - at - home mother , Alicia returns to the workforce as a litigator to provide for her two children .
CAST MAIN * Julianna Margulies as Alicia Florrick * Matt Czuchry as Cary Agos
* Alan Cumming as Eli Gold * Cush Jumbo as Lucca Quinn * Makenzie Vega as Grace Florrick * Zach Grenier as David Lee * Graham Phillips as Zach Florrick * Jeffrey Dean Morgan as Jason Crouse * Christine Baranski as Diane Lockhart RECURRING
* Margo Martindale as Ruth Eastman
* Chris Noth as Peter Florrick * Jerry Adler as Howard Lyman
* Christopher McDonald as Judge Don Schakowsky
* Nicole Roderick as Nora * Michael J. Fox as Louis Canning
*
Sarah Steele as Marissa Gold * Nikki M. James as Monica Timmons
* Mary Beth Peil as Jackie Florrick * Chris Butler as Matan Brody * Will Patton as Mike Tascioni
* Matthew Morrison as Connor Fox
* Vanessa L. Williams as Courtney Paige * Stockard Channing as
Veronica Loy * Mike Pniewski as Frank Landau * Peter Gallagher as Ethan Carver * Brian Muller as Brian Carter * Rob Bartlett as Bernie Bukovitz * Dallas Roberts as Owen Cavanaugh
* Gary Cole as Kurt McVeigh * Kurt Fuller as Judge Peter Dunaway * Dominic Chianese as Judge Michael Marx
* Mo Rocca as Ted Willoughby
* Megan Hilty as Holly Westfall * David Paymer as Judge Richard Cuesta
GUEST * Christian Borle as Carter Schmidt
* Amy Irving as Phyllis Barsetto * Mamie Gummer as Nancy Crozier * Bridget Regan as Madeline Smulders * David Krumholtz as Josh Mariner * John Benjamin Hickey as Neil Gross * Patrick Breen as Captain Terrence Hicks
* Carrie Preston as Elsbeth Tascioni * Denis O'Hare as Judge Charles Abernathy * Anna Camp as Caitlyn D'Arcy
* Zach Woods as Jeff Dellinger * Renée Elise Goldsberry as Geneva Pine * Josh Charles as Will Gardner EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The seventh season of The Good Wife received positive reviews .
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reports a 100 % certified fresh rating based on 21 reviews .
The website 's consensus reads , " Reinvigorated storylines and an even stronger cast keep The Good Wife fresh in its seventh season - and away from the doldrums that overcome many long - running dramas . "
However , like the latter part of season six where viewer ratings fell precipitously , the seventh season has received criticism for the " incredibly uneven [ plotting ] , sucking so much of the vitality and urgency out of the show " .
Variety noted that in Season Seven that " there were notably more of subplots and segues that were , at best , time - fillers and at worst , eyeroll - inducing " and said it " was obvious that it was time for the show to go " .
TV.com observed that " obituaries for the show were already burying it instead of praising it , pointing to where it all went wrong , or that it was n't even truly that great to begin with .
An episode like " End " solidified a lot of those arguments .
Hell , it solidified a lot of my arguments about this season being a grab bag of ideas .
"
Similar to how Kalinda Sharma was sidelined in Season Six which led to her departure , Season Seven main characters like Cary Agos and Diane Lockhart lacked compelling storylines to the point where they almost became irrelevant .
With the departure of male lead Josh Charles ( who played Will Gardner ) in Season Five , the show 's " writers really struggled to rebuild that same type of long - term emotional storytelling .
His departure left a gap that was never fully filled again " .
The finale episode of The Good Wife : " End " had a divided reaction among viewers and critics , with many praising a fitting ending to a complex character with others who argued of its ambiguity and absence of a conclusion - particularly with Alicia 's love life .
The finale drew controversy in its last scene when Diane Lockhart slaps Alicia Florrick after betraying her in court to save Peter from jail .
Alicia is then left alone in a hallway before walking away to a future of uncertainty regarding her relationship with Jason , her career and political life .
Vanity Fair noting "
As Breaking Bad famously tracked the evolution of Walter White " from Mr. Chips to Scarface , " The Good Wife followed Alicia as she evolved into Peter .
The Kings claim the show was " moving in the direction where there was n't much difference between who Alicia was and who her husband was .
" Is Alicia a villain or an anti - hero ?
It 's hard to quite see her that way after all the good she 's done for so many seasons .
But the inclusion of Will Gardner in the finale momentarily humanizes Alicia while also highlighting the idea that Alicia 's transformation into Peter has been a longtime coming . " and claiming that " The show 's incredible finale belongs to an earlier age of television . "
Emily Nussbaum of The New Yorker said " it was an ending that commanded respect . "
The show garnered a huge backlash on social media and has been rated one of the lowest episodes of the series on IMDB .
In anticipation of a divided audience , Robert and Michelle King penned a letter to the fans explaining their creative decisions .
REFERENCES