CODE BLACK ( TV SERIES )
Code Black is an American medical drama television series created by Michael Seitzman which premiered on CBS on September 30 , 2015 .
It takes place in an overcrowded and understaffed emergency room in Los Angeles , California , and is based on a documentary by Ryan McGarry .
On May 16 , 2016 , the show was renewed for a 13-episode second season which premiered on September 28 , 2016 .
On November 14 , 2016 , CBS added three more episodes to bring the season two total to 16 .
On May 14 , 2017 , the series was renewed for a third season , which premiered on April 25 , 2018 .
On May 24 , 2018 , CBS cancelled the series after three seasons .
The series finale aired on July 18 , 2018 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The show centers on the fictional Angels Memorial Hospital , where four first - year residents and their colleagues must tend to patients in an understaffed , busy emergency room that lacks sufficient resources .
EPISODES
CAST AND CHARACTERS
MAIN * Marcia Gay Harden as Dr. Leanne Rorish , an ER attending physician , known to current and former Residents as " Daddy " .
Her husband and two children were killed after their car was hit by a drunk driver ; this sometimes influences her medical decisions .
Originally the ER 's Residency Director , Leanne is promoted to Director of Emergency Medicine following the death of Gina Perello , though is replaced in this capacity by Dr Campbell in " Second Year " .
In " Fallen Angels , " Leanne is shown to have taken guardianship of a young orphan .
* Raza Jaffrey as Dr. Neal Hudson , an ER attending physician .
A British - Indian former surgeon , his approach is quieter and more people - oriented .
He connected with Christa during her first year of residency .
In " Hail Mary " , Neal becomes a surgical attending , and is once again assigned to the ER ( season 1 ) .
* Bonnie Somerville as Dr. Christa Lorenson , a mature first - year resident .
She was married with a son who died of brain cancer .
Her experience and her divorce motivated her to attend medical school ( season 1 ) .
* Melanie Chandra as Dr. Malaya Pineda , a second - year resident .
She went to medical school and did her internship at Angels Memorial , and is therefore more familiar with the ER .
She is a lesbian , who was once involved with a resident when she was a medical student ( seasons 1–2 ) .
* William Allen Young as Dr. Rollie Guthrie , an ER attending physician with a very nurturing style ; he takes Angus under his wing in his first days in the ER .
Guthrie 's wife killed herself , straining his relationship with his son , a surgeon .
He also had a daughter who died from carbon monoxide poisoning while Guthrie tried to save his son from a similar fate .
During season 2 , Guthrie is diagnosed with Parkinson 's disease , and undergoes corrective neurological surgery to delay the onset of symptoms .
* Harry Ford as Dr. Angus Leighton , a third - year resident .
His father is on the hospital board , and he feels overshadowed by that and by his older brother , a former resident , but slowly grows in confidence .
* Benjamin Hollingsworth as Dr. Mario Savetti , a third - year resident .
He grew up poor and sees emergency medicine as his only way out .
He was previously a bartender .
* Luis Guzmán as Jesse Salander , known as " Mama " .
A senior nurse who manages the residents , Jesse is tough on the outside but caring and supportive of the students .
He and Rorish have a long - term , close friendship .
* Boris Kodjoe as Dr. Will Campbell , Chief of Surgery .
A highly regarded surgeon who becomes the new Chief of the ER in season 2 in order to save costs , causing strife between him and Leanne .
Campbell has a disabled daughter ( season 2–3 ; recurring in season 1 ) .
* Jillian Murray as Dr. Heather Pinkney , a surgical resident who becomes involved with Mario .
He quickly ends it when he hears about her side relationship with Dr. Campbell .
She gets in further trouble when it 's revealed she 's providing Angus with drugs .
When confronted by Campbell , she threatens to turn their past relationship into a sexual harassment case .
While treating a patient with unknown deadly virus , she 's bitten by the patient and succumbs to the illness ( season 2 ; recurring in season 1 ) .
* Rob Lowe as Dr. Ethan Willis , a Army Medical Corps colonel attached to the prestigious Combat Casualty Care research program .
He joins the ER staff at Angels Memorial for the remainder of his service contract after the Army pulls him from the battlefield in Afghanistan .
Willis brings with him revolutionary military medical techniques , and builds a strong friendship with Dr Leanne Rorish ( season 2–3 ) .
* Noah Gray - Cabey as Elliot Dixon , a second - year resident in the ER ( season 3 ; recurring season 2 ) .
* Emily Tyra as Noa Kean , an ER resident who embarks upon a relationship with Mario ( season 3 ; recurring season 2 ) * Emily Alyn Lind as Ariel ( season 3 ; guest seasons 1–2 )
* Moon Bloodgood as Rox Valenzuela , a Los Angeles Fire Department paramedic .
Rox is Ethan 's ride - along partner ( season 3 ) .
RECURRING
* Angela Relucio as Risa Park R.N. , a nurse in the Emergency Department .
* Ellia English as Isabel Mendez R.N. , a nurse in the Emergency Department .
* Emily Nelson as Hannah Reynolds R.N. , a nurse in the Emergency Department .
* Tommy Dewey as Dr. Mike Leighton , Angus ' older brother , and a recently hired ER attending physician .
He becomes the Director of the Residency Program following Rorish 's promotion ( seasons 1–2 ) .
* Cress Williams as Dr. Cole Guthrie , a surgeon and Rollie 's son .
His relationship with his father is strained by his mother 's suicide ( seasons 1–2 ) .
SEASON 1
* Jeff Hephner as Dr. Ed Harbert , Angels Memorial Hospital CEO and Gina 's boyfriend .
He and Leanne clash frequently , but their mutual respect is obvious .
* Kevin Dunn as Dr. Mark Taylor , the Director of the Emergency Department at Angels Memorial , who is on leave during an investigation into potential mismanagement .
* Shiri Appleby as Dr. Carla Niven , a former resident at Angels Memorial , Malaya 's ex - girlfriend .
She is diagnosed with leukemia while pregnant and dies shortly after delivering the baby .
* Christina Vidal as Dr. Gina Perello , the replacement Director of the Emergency Department at Angels Memorial , who takes over when Dr. Taylor is put on leave .
She was murdered by Malaya 's stalker .
* Gabrielle Carteris as Amy Wolowitz , R.N. , a nurse in the Emergency Department .
* Meagan Good as Dr. Grace Adams , Neal 's ex - girlfriend .
SEASON 2
* Nafessa Williams as Charlotte Piel , a new first year resident in the ER who was a popular teenaged actress .
She was shot and killed in the waiting room while treating patients .
* Kathleen Rose Perkins as Dr. Amanda Nolan , a psychiatrist at the hospital .
SEASON 3
* Tyler Perez as Diego Avila , son of a hospital board member and a first year resident who drives the staff and patients crazy with his video camera as he is making a documentary about the Angels ER .
* Alex Lange as Max , a young cancer patient with whom Ariel strikes up a friendship which turns into young love .
He died minutes before he was supposed to receive a transplant .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On January 27 , 2015 , the show 's pilot episode was greenlighted by CBS .
On June 4 , Brett Mahoney was appointed as executive producer for Code Black .
On October 23 , 2015 , CBS ordered six new scripts for Code Black .
The following month , CBS ordered five additional episodes .
CBS renewed the show for a second season in May 2016 .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
On February 17 , 2015 , Marcia Gay Harden was cast as Christa , a soccer mom who lost her son to cancer .
On February 23 , Melanie Chandra was cast as Malaya , a doctor beginning her residency .
Maggie Grace was cast as Dr. Leanne Rorish , the lead of the show , the following day .
On March 3 , Luis Guzman was set to star as Jose Santiago , a senior nurse .
The character 's name was later changed to Jesse Salander .
The following day , Raza Jaffrey was cast as Neal , and Ben Hollingsworth was set to star as Mario , a new resident .
When Grace left the show before filming began , the role of Leanne was then given to Harden , and Bonnie Somerville was cast in Harden 's role as Christa .
At the end of season 1 , Somerville and Jaffrey departed the main cast , and recurring actors Jillian Murray and Boris Kodjoe joined the main cast , reprising their roles of Dr. Heather Pickney and Dr.
Will Campbell respectively .
Rob Lowe also joined the main cast as Colonel Ethan Willis , a Combat Casualty Care doctor assigned to Angels as part of a U.S. Army training program .
In 2017 , Moon Bloodgood was cast in the recurring role of paramedic Rox Valenzuela for the series ' third season , and was subsequently promoted to series regular as of the third season 's fourth episode .
Bloodgood 's casting followed the departures of both Chandra and Murray .
Former recurring actors Emily Alyn Lind , Noah Gray - Cabey and Emily Tyra were also promoted to the main cast for the third season .
INTERNATIONAL BROADCAST Section::::International broadcast .
In the UK the show is shown on W !
with Season 3 premiering in late May 2018 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Code Black has received mixed reviews from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes the series has a rating of 54 % , based on 39 reviews .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " While not reinventing the stethoscope , Code Black is an above - average medical drama , with appropriately theatrical storylines that make up for sometimes cheesy dialogue .
" On Metacritic , the series has a score of 53 out of 100 , based on 26 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
However on IMDB Code Black received an average score of 8.1/10 based on 8832 votes .
At the 2016 Monte - Carlo Television Festival , Harden won the Best Actress in a TV Series Golden Nymph Award , while Code Black was nominated for Best TV Series Drama .
RATINGS
Section::::Ratings . !
scope="col " rowspan="2 " Season ! scope="col
" rowspan="2 " Timeslot ( ET ) ! scope="col " rowspan="2 " Episodes !
scope="col " colspan="2 " Premiered ! scope="col " colspan="2 " Ended ! scope="col " rowspan="2 " TV season ! scope="col " rowspan="2 " Rank ! scope="col " rowspan="2 " Viewers ! scope="col " Date !
scope="col " Viewers(in millions ) ! scope="col " Date ! scope="col " Viewers(in millions ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS