NEXT
UNITED KINGDOM GENERAL ELECTION 2010
election • MPs 2015 election • MPs 2017 election • MPs
The next general election in the United Kingdom is scheduled to be held on 5 May 2022 under the Fixed - term Parliaments Act 2011 .
The election may be held at an earlier date in the event of an early election motion being passed by a super - majority of two - thirds in the House of Commons , or a vote of no confidence in the government which is not followed by a vote of confidence within 14 days .
ELECTORAL SYSTEM Section::::Electoral system .
Each parliamentary constituency of the United Kingdom elects one MP to the House of Commons using the first - past - the - post voting system .
VOTING ELIGIBILITY
Section::::Voting eligibility .
In order to vote in the general election , one must be : * on the Electoral Register ;
* aged 18 or over on polling day ; * a British , Irish or Commonwealth citizen ; * a resident at an address in the United Kingdom ( or a British citizen living abroad who has been registered to vote in the UK in the last 15 years ) ; and * not legally excluded from voting ( for example a convicted person detained in prison or a mental hospital , or unlawfully at large if he / she would otherwise have been detained , or
a person found guilty of certain corrupt or illegal practices ) or disqualified from voting ( peers sitting in the House of Lords ) .
Individuals must be registered to vote by midnight twelve working days before polling day .
Anyone who qualifies as an anonymous elector has until midnight six working days before polling day to register .
A person who has two homes ( such as a university student who has a term - time address and lives at home during holidays ) may be able to register to vote at both addresses as long as they are not in the same electoral area , but can only vote in one constituency at the general election .
It is current UK government policy to pass a law removing the 15-year limit on expatriate Britons voting before the next general election takes place , as mentioned in the 2017 Conservative Party manifesto , which stated ( page 42 )
" We will legislate for votes for life for British overseas electors " .
BOUNDARY REVIEW
Section::::Boundary review .
The postponed Sixth Periodic Review of Westminster constituencies proposed reducing the number of constituencies from 650 to 600 .
In April 2016 , each of the four parliamentary Boundary Commissions of the United KingdomConservative PartyLabour PartyScottish National PartyDemocratic Unionist PartyLiberal DemocratsSinn FéinPlaid CymruGreen Party ( England & Wales ) DATE OF THE ELECTION Section::::Date of the election .
The Fixed - term Parliaments Act 2011 introduced fixed - term parliaments to the United Kingdom , with elections scheduled on the first Thursday in May of the fifth year after the previous general election .
Removing the power of the monarch , on advice of the prime minister , to dissolve parliament before its five - year maximum length , the act permits early dissolution if the House of Commons votes by a two - thirds supermajority , as occurred in the 2017 general election .
Parliament is also dissolved if a government loses a vote of no confidence by a simple majority and a new government is not formed within 14 days .
The next general election is due to take place on 5 May 2022 .
Under the Electoral Registration and Administration Act 2013 parliament would be dissolved 25 working days before this date on 28 March 2022 .
Under the Fixed - term Parliaments Act the prime minister may schedule polling day up to two months after 5 May 2022 , subject to approval by both Houses .
The Conservative Party manifesto at the 2017 general election proposed repealing the Fixed - term Parliaments Act 2011 .
CONTESTING POLITICAL PARTIES AND CANDIDATES
Section::::Contesting political parties and candidates .
Most candidates are representatives of a political party , which must be registered with the Electoral Commission 's Register of Political Parties .
Candidates who do not belong to a registered party can use an " independent " label , or no label at all .
The Conservative Party and Labour Party have been the two biggest political parties , and have supplied every Prime Minister since 1935 .
Parties in the tables below are sorted by their results in the 2017 general election .
The leader of the party commanding a majority of support in the House of Commons is the person who is called on by the monarch to form a government as Prime Minister , while the leader of the largest party not in government becomes the Leader of the Opposition .
Other parties also form shadow ministerial teams .
The leaders of the SNP and Plaid Cymru are not members of parliament , but instead members of their respective devolved legislatures , and so these parties have separate leaders in the House of Commons
( Ian Blackford for the SNP and Liz Saville Roberts in the case of Plaid Cymru ) .
!
rowspan="2 " colspan="2 " Party !
rowspan="2 " Party leader(s ) ! rowspan="2 " Leader since !
rowspan="2 " Leader 's seat !
colspan="2
"
Last election !
% ofvotes !
Seats Tim Farron announced his departure as Liberal Democrat leader shortly after the June 2017 election , staying on in a caretaker basis pending the Liberal Democrats leadership election .
He was replaced by Vince Cable .
Facing a no confidence vote by her party in December 2018 , Theresa May told MPs she would not contest the next scheduled general election ( i.e. in 2022 ) as leader .
Northern Ireland
While a number of UK parties organise in Northern Ireland ( e.g. Labour Party in Northern Ireland , but they do not field candidates ) and field candidates for election ( e.g. , Conservative , UKIP ) , the main Northern Ireland parties are different from those in the rest of the UK .
!
rowspan="2 " colspan="2 " Party !
rowspan="2 " Leader(s ) !
rowspan="2 " Leader since !
rowspan="2 " Leader 's seat !
colspan="2
"
Last election !
% !
Seats MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT NOT STANDING FOR RE - ELECTION Section::::Members of Parliament not standing for re - election .
+ Members of Parliament not standing for re - election !
scope="col " MP ! scope="col " Seat ! scope="col " First elected !
colspan="2 " scope="col "
Party ! scope="col " Date announced OPINION POLLING SEE
ALSO
* Next Conservative Party ( UK ) leadership election FOOTNOTES REFERENCES