GREY 'S ANATOMY ( SEASON 12 )
The twelfth season of the American television medical drama Grey 's Anatomy was ordered on May 7 , 2015 , by ABC .
It premiered on September 24 , 2015 , in the United States on ABC .
The twelfth season includes the show 's 250th episode , Guess
Who 's Coming to Dinner , which is the fifth episode in the season .
The season is produced by ABC Studios , in association with Shondaland Production Company and The Mark Gordon Company ; the showrunners being Stacy McKee and William Harper .
The season commenced airing with the episode " Sledgehammer " and concluded with " Family Affair " .
This season was the first not to feature Patrick Dempsey as Dr. Derek Shepherd following the death of the character at the end of the eleventh season .
On June 5 , 2015 ABC announced that Jason George has been promoted to series regular status after having performed a recurring role as Dr. Ben Warren since the sixth season of the medical drama .
Part way into the season Martin Henderson was introduced as new regular character , Dr. Nathan Riggs .
In the tenth episode of the season Giacomo Gianniotti was also promoted to series regular status as intern Andrew DeLuca .
The season , garnered 11.21 million average viewers and was ranked 21st overall in total viewers which is fifteen spots higher than the previous season .
TV critics and analysts noted the renewed interest in viewership with Rich Kissell of Variety calling it a ' renaissance . '
Grey 's Anatomy finished the 2015–16 television season as ABC 's highest - rated drama in the 18 - 49 demographics and also ranked among the top five dramas on all of broadcast , averaging a 3.9 rating in the demo , an unprecedented accomplishment for a show in its 12th season .
On March 3 , 2016 , the network renewed Grey 's Anatomy for a thirteenth season .
PLOTS Section::::Plots .
The season follows the story of surgical residents , fellows , and attendings as they experience the difficulties of the competitive careers they have chosen .
It is set in the surgical wing of the fictional Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital , located in Seattle , Washington .
The season takes place three months after the events of the last season finale in which Richard and Catherine got married .
April and Jackson 's relationship has hit the rocks after April has resumed her work overseas in Jordan , leaving Jackson high and dry once again .
Once the new intern year begins , Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) starts teaching the new interns an anatomy class .
Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) is appointed the new Chief of Surgery , much to the dismay of her husband Ben Warren ( Jason George ) , who starts to feel like he is the inferior one in their relationship , leading to some tension between the two .
Maggie Pierce ( Kelly McCreary ) begins a relationship with intern Andrew DeLuca ( Giacomo Gianniotti ) , however they face some problems that many new relationships face .
However these problems become much worse for the two when Andrew starts to avoid Maggie .
April Kepner ( Sarah Drew ) returns from Jordan in the premiere wanting to improve her relationship with her husband , Jackson Avery ( Jesse Williams ) , while Jackson does n't feel the same way and wants to end their relationship .
The two start trying to work through their problems and end up have a one - night stand .
This results in April becoming pregnant with Jackson 's baby , although she does not wish to tell him .
Jackson then believes that there is no way of the two working through their problems and wants a divorce , to which April agrees , withholding her pregnancy from him .
Penelope " Penny " Blake ( Samantha Sloyan ) is introduced as a new transfer resident from Dillard Medical Center and new love interest for Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) .
Callie brings Penny to a dinner party hosted by Meredith , Amelia and Maggie .
Once arriving Meredith immediately recognizes Penny as one of the doctors that worked on her husband , Derek Shepherd at the time of his death .
This news brings much dismay to Callie , however she still continues into a relationship with Penny causing tension between herself , Meredith and Amelia Shepherd .
Meredith begins working with Penny and finds it very difficult , although after seeking the advice of Richard Webber ( James Pickens Jr. ) , Meredith forms a working relationship with Penny and the two form a student and mentor bond .
Nathan Riggs ( Martin Henderson ) , a friend of April 's from Jordan , is hired by Bailey .
He is revealed to have a dark history with Owen Hunt ( Kevin McKidd ) , resulting in much friction between Hunt and Riggs , to the point where there is even a physical conflict .
Amelia Shepherd ( Caterina Scorsone ) seeks to help Owen through his traumatic relationship with Riggs , although Owen does not accept the help offered to him by Amelia .
This leads to Amelia feeling hurt and to her drinking , despite the fact that she is a recovering addict .
CAST
MAIN
CAST
* Ellen Pompeo as Dr. Meredith Grey * Justin Chambers as Dr. Alex Karev * Chandra Wilson as Dr. Miranda Bailey
* James Pickens Jr. as Dr. Richard Webber
* Sara Ramirez as Dr. Callie Torres
* Kevin McKidd as Dr. Owen Hunt
* Jessica Capshaw as Dr. Arizona Robbins
* Sarah Drew as Dr. April Kepner
* Jesse Williams as Dr. Jackson Avery
* Caterina Scorsone as Dr. Amelia Shepherd
* Camilla Luddington as Dr. Jo Wilson
* Jerrika Hinton as Dr. Stephanie Edwards
* Kelly McCreary as Dr. Maggie Pierce * Jason George as Dr. Ben Warren
* Martin Henderson as Dr. Nathan Riggs ( From Episode 6 )
* Giacomo Gianniotti as Dr. Andrew DeLuca
( From Episode 10 ) RECURRING CAST * Joe Adler as Dr. Isaac Cross
* Samantha Sloyan as Dr. Penelope Blake
* Joe Dinicol as Dr. Mitchell Spencer
* Debbie Allen as Dr. Catherine Avery * Nicole Cummins as Paramedic Nicole
* Scott Elrod as Dr. Major
Will Thorpe * Wilmer Valderrama as Kyle Diaz * Vanessa Bell Calloway as Lucinda Gamble * Rebecca McFarland as Tara Parker
* Morgan Lily as Jennifer Parker GUEST STARS
* Joey Lauren Adams as Dr. Tracy McConnell
* Mandalynn Carlson as Jessica Tanner
* Lindsay Kay Hayward as Jade Bell * Maya Stojan as Tatiana Flauto * Debra Mooney as Evelyn Hunt
* Drew Rausch as John Finch
* Bill Smitrovich as Therapist * Skyler Shaye as Katie Bryce * Casey Wilson as Courtney Hall * Rita Moreno as Gayle McColl * Robert Baker as Dr. Charles Percy
* Gwendoline Yeo as Michelle Carpio CASTING Section::::Cast .
Section::::Casting .
On January 23 , 2014 it was reported that Ellen Pompeo and Patrick Dempsey had renewed their contracts for another two seasons , as Drs .
Meredith Grey and Derek Shepherd , respectively , meaning their characters would be staying on the medical drama for seasons 11 and 12 .
On April 24 , 2015 , Patrick Dempsey revealed that he would be leaving Grey 's Anatomy after the eleventh season despite having a contract through another season .
Thus , this will be the first season in which Dr. Derek Shepherd , portrayed by Patrick Dempsey , is not included in the main cast of characters .
Dempsey 's character Dr. Derek Shepherd was killed off towards the end of the eleventh season in the episode " How to Save a Life " , meaning he will not return for the twelfth season as previously thought .
ABC put out a statement claiming Dempsey wanted to pursue other interests .
On May 2 , 2014 , the rest of the six original cast mates , Justin Chambers , Chandra Wilson and James Pickens Jr. , excluding Sandra Oh , renewed their contracts for another two seasons ( 11 and 12 ) as Drs .
Alex Karev , Miranda Bailey , and Richard Webber , respectively .
Sara Ramirez also renewed her contract for another two seasons as Dr. Callie Torres , which will run out after the twelfth season .
However , it was later announced on May 20 , 2016 that Sara Ramirez , who portrayed Callie Torres for ten seasons , would leave Grey 's .
Chambers announced on March 11 , 2016 , on Twitter that he will return as Dr. Alex Karev for the 13th season .
On June 5 , 2015 , it was announced that after several seasons of being a recurring role , Jason George was upgraded to a series regular .
It was announced on June 15 , 2015 , that Martin Henderson , who played a doctor on the ShondaLand produced show Off the Map , would be added as a series regular for the twelfth season .
He will make his debut in the middle of the season , according to Rhimes .
On June 28 , 2015 , it was announced that Jessica Capshaw , whose contract expired after Season 11 , had renewed her contract for another three seasons as Dr. Arizona Robbins .
This means that her character will be staying on the show through seasons 12 as well as possible seasons 13 and 14 .
It was announced on September 11 , 2015 that Chasing Amy actress Joey Lauren Adams would guest star as Dr. Tracy McConnell , Dr. Bailey 's opponent for Chief of Surgery , and appeared in the season premiere .
TV veteran Bill Smitrovich was announced on November 12 , 2015 , to guest star as a therapist in the tenth episode of the season .
After appearing as Dr. Andrew DeLuca as a guest star in the first eight episodes , Giacomo Gianniotti was upgraded to a series regular on January 8 , 2016 .
It was announced on January 8 , 2016 that Maya Stojan will appear in one episode as a guest star which later turned out to be Jackson 's patient Tatiana whom he treated over several years .
On February 26 , 2016 , it was announced that Casey Wilson and Rita Moreno would both guest star in episode fourteen of the season .
Variety announced on March 8 , 2016 , that Wilmer Valderrama was cast as Kyle Diaz , a recurring role which he will play in a multi - episode arc .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
On May 7 , 2015 , ABC renewed Grey 's Anatomy for a twelfth season for the 2015 - 16 television season .
ABC president Paul Lee confirmed that the twelfth season would not be the final season , as he said " I would like to see it run for many , many years to come .
It is powerful , vibrant brand with incredibly passionate audiences " Debbie Allen was promoted to executive producer for the twelfth season , and directed multiple episodes for the season while still recurring on camera as Dr. Catherine Avery .
Production began on May 21 , 2015 , when Rhimes announced on Twitter that the writers were in full swing mapping the twelfth season .
A promotional poster was released on September 16 , 2015 .
The season included the 250th episode named " Guess Who 's Coming to Dinner " , being the fifth episode .
The cast of Grey 's Anatomy had a special celebration for the 250th episode of the show with several actors sharing the celebration on Twitter on September 15 , 2015 .
Jessica Capshaw revealed that the episode included her favorite scene so far in the season .
Because of the annual Halloween television special It 's the Great Pumpkin , Charlie Brown , the twelfth season had a hiatus on October 29 , 2015 following the 250th episode .
The remaining fall schedule for ABC was announced on November 16 , 2015 where it was announced that Grey 's Anatomy would air eight episodes in the fall with the fall finale to air on November 19 , 2015 , just like the rest of ABC 's primetime lineup " TGIT " Scandal and How to Get Away with Murder , which was the same last year .
The remaining 16 episodes will air after the winter break , beginning on February 11 , 2016 , and ending on May 19 , 2016 , as a result of ABC airing the television miniseries Madoff over two nights on February 3–4 , 2016 in the same time - slot as Grey 's Anatomy and Scandal .
On March 3 , 2016 , ABC announced that Grey 's Anatomy was renewed for a 13th season .
WRITING Section::::Writing .
Regarding the death of Dr. Derek Shepherd , showrunner Shonda Rhimes commented on how future seasons would be affected by the death as she said : " Now , Meredith and the entire Grey 's Anatomy family are about to enter uncharted territory as we head into this new chapter of her life .
The possibilities for what may come are endless .
As Ellis Grey would say : the carousel never stops turning . "
During an interview with TVLine , Shonda Rhimes said that the twelfth season will take " a much lighter tone " in the wake of Derek 's death .
She continued talking about Meredith 's evolvement as she said " Meredith is single , and she is living this life that she 's never thought she 'd be living again .
She 's living in a house with her sisters .
She 's surrounded by women who are dating and having a whole life , and she 's not interested in all that .
[ Meredith is ] starting to wonder is there a second life here or are your best years behind you ?
I guess the theme [ of Season 12 ] is rebirth .
That evolution for that character is beautiful " .
HEIGL 'S RUMORED RETURN
Section::::Heigl 's rumored return .
Rumors began back in 2012 about a possible return of Katherine Heigl 's character Izzie Stevens to Grey 's Anatomy after Heigl expressed her desire to return for an arc to complete Izzie 's story .
In May 2015 , rumors began to swirl that Heigl would return for the twelfth season .
Michael Ausiello from TVLine speculated on the return as he thought the upcoming twelfth season would be the perfect opportunity for Heigl to return to the show .
He wrote that " the show needs a jolt of old - school energy to improve its vitals going into Season 12 , and an Izzie comeback would be just what the doctor ordered . "
Heigl declined the rumors of returning to the show 's current season in an interview with Entertainment Tonight .
At the ABC 's Television Critics Association press tours , Rhimes declined the rumors as she explained her reasons : " I 'm done with that story .
I 've turned that idea over in my mind a thousand times and thought about how it would go .
And I do n't think so . "
RAMIREZ 'S EXIT
Section::::Ramirez 's exit .
The season marked the last appearance for long - time cast member Sara Ramirez who played Dr. Callie Torres on the series since 2006 .
Her character was involved in a custody battle with ex - wife Dr. Arizona Robbins , played by Jessica Capshaw , which led to the former 's move to New York from Seattle .
On May 19 , in a note posted on Twitter after the season finale , Ramirez wrote that she was " taking some welcome time off . "
Rhimes replied to the tweet by saying , " I will miss Callie tremendously , but am excited for what the future holds for Sara .
She will always have a home at Shondaland . "
Later , speaking at the Vulture Festival in New York City on May 22 , Rhimes , told that she did n't know that Ramirez was leaving until they had shot the finale .
She addressed Callie 's send - off and said , " This one was different because it was n't a big planned thing , I had a different plan going and when Sara came in and said , ' I really need to take this break , ' I was lucky that we 'd shot the end of the season with her going to New York . "
FILMING Section::::Filming .
Prepping for the season began on July 13 , 2015 .
The table read for the premiere was on July 15 , 2015 .
Filming began on July 22 , 2015 .
Two - time Academy Awards winner Denzel Washington was announced by TVLine to direct the ninth episode of the season , which will be Washington 's first go at directing television .
He previously directed the films Antwone Fisher and The Great Debaters .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
The number in the " No . overall " column refers to the episode 's number within the overall series , whereas the number in the " No . in season " column refers to the episode 's number within this particular season . "
U.S. viewers in millions " refers to the number of Americans in millions who watched the episodes live .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
NPR listed Grey 's Anatomy as No .
7 on their list of the best television of 2015 .
The A.V. Club 's Caroline Siede described the twelfth season of Grey 's Anatomy as " phenomenal " , stating that the series underwent a " powerful renaissance this year " .
A final grade of B+ was given to the season .
LIVE + SD RATINGS
Section::::Live + SD ratings . !
No . inseries !
No .
inseason !
Episode !
Air date !
Time slot ( EST ) !
Rating / Share ( 18–49 ) !
Viewers ( m ) ! 18–49
Rank !
Viewership rank !
Drama rank !
2.8/10 !
9.55 !
14 !
21 !
4 !
2.3/8 !
8.58 !
16 !
25 ! 4 !
2.2/8 !
8.12 !
12 !
23 ! 5 !
2.3/8 !
8.25 !
12 !
19 ! 4 !
2.4/8 !
8.96 !
12 !
17 ! 3 !
2.3/8 !
8.50 !
11 !
19 ! 2 !
2.2/7 !
8.02 !
12 !
24 ! 3 !
2.5/8 !
8.50 !
10 !
19 ! 2 !
2.4/8 !
8.28 !
6 !
17 ! 3 !
2.2/7 !
7.82 !
5 !
15 ! 2 !
2.1/7 !
7.23 !
10 !
24 ! 3 !
2.2/8 !
7.67 !
5 !
17 ! 1 !
2.1/7 !
7.53 !
7 !
17 ! 1 !
2.1/7 !
7.83 !
7 !
18 ! 1 !
2.1/7 !
7.91 !
9 ! 15 ! 2 !
2.2/8 !
7.77 ! 6 !
20 ! 2 !
2.1/8 !
7.35 ! 7 !
19 ! 2 !
2.2/8 !
7.97 !
4 !
20 ! 2 !
2.2/8 !
7.97 !
4 !
20 ! 2 !
2.0/8 !
7.65 !
4 !
21 !
2 !
2.0/7 !
7.91 !
4 !
20 ! 2 !
2.0/8 !
7.66 ! 6 !
19 ! 2 !
2.1/8 !
7.77 !
3 !
18 ! 2 !
2.3/9 !
8.19 ! 4 !
12 ! 3 LIVE + 7 DAY ( DVR ) RATINGS AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
Award DVD RELEASE * 24 Episodes
* 6-Disc Set * English ( Dolby Digital 5.1 Surround )
* Audio Commentaries *
In Stitches — Check Out The Cast Cutting Up , Both In And Out Of the OR * Deleted Scenes REFERENCES