BUNK'D
Bunk'd is an American comedy television series created by Pamela Eells O'Connell that premiered on Disney Channel on July 31 , 2015 , and is a spinoff of Jessie .
The series stars Peyton List , Karan Brar , and Skai Jackson from Jessie , as well as Miranda May. PLOT Section::::Plot .
Emma , Ravi , and Zuri leave New York City and head off to Moose Rump , Maine , to spend the summer at Camp Kikiwaka , where their parents met as teenagers .
The Ross children and their new friends try their best to adapt to their lives at the camp , which was founded by Jedediah Swearengen and is named after a legendary creature that lives in the nearby forest .
In " We Did n't Start the Fire " , several cabins at Camp Kikiwaka are destroyed by a fire after a candle was left unattended .
In the premiere of the third season , " We Ca n't Bear It " , the Ross children return with a new generation of campers to find the cabins were never rebuilt and Gladys ran away with the insurance money .
The Ross children then convince their parents to buy Camp Kikiwaka and put them in charge .
EPISODES
CAST AND CHARACTERS
MAIN * Peyton List as Emma Ross ( seasons 1–3 ) , the oldest of the Ross children and counselor - in - training in Cabin Woodchuck .
She is shown to have a unique sense of fashion .
She becomes manager of the camp in the third season .
* Karan Brar as Ravi Ross ( seasons 1–3 ) , an extremely smart counselor - in - training in Cabin Grizzly .
The second - youngest of the Ross children , he brings his pet Asian water monitor Mrs. Kipling to camp .
In the third season , he becomes camp chef and lead male counselor .
* Skai Jackson as Zuri Ross ( seasons 1–3 ) , a sweet yet sharp , sarcastic , and talkative girl .
She is the youngest of the Ross children and is a camper in Cabin Woodchuck .
* Miranda May as Lou , a highly enthusiastic farm girl and Emma 's friend .
She is the head counselor of Cabin Woodchuck and is a longtime friend of Xander .
* Kevin Quinn as Xander ( seasons 1–2 ) , the popular head counselor of Cabin Grizzly and resident musician .
He is a longtime friend of Lou and becomes the love interest for Emma .
* Nathan Arenas as Jorge ( seasons 1–2 ) , a bespectacled boy of Hispanic descent who is Ravi 's friend and a camper in Cabin Grizzly .
He is shown to be very messy , unclean , and calls people " weird " .
Jorge once claimed that he was abducted by aliens .
*
Nina Lu as Tiffany ( seasons 1–2 ) , a young girl camper of Chinese descent whom Zuri befriends .
She has an overbearing mother who expects a lot out of her .
* Mallory James Mahoney as Destiny ( season 3 ) , a girl who has won almost all of the beauty pageants she has competed in .
* Raphael Alejandro as Matteo ( season 3 ) , a cautious boy who can find danger in any situation , packs spider and snake bite kits , would rather not be at Camp Kikiwaka , and speaks Portuguese when he is either scared or emotional .
* Will Buie Jr. as Finn ( season 3 ) , Lou 's second cousin and a messy boy who does not care about hygiene , washing his clothes , or using his toothbrush .
In " By All Memes " , his last name is revealed to be Sawyer .
RECURRING
* Mary Scheer as Gladys ( seasons 1–2 ) , the strict proprietor of Camp Kikiwaka who is a descendant of Jedediah Swearengen .
She has been jealous of Christina Ross ever since Christina had " stolen " Morgan from her .
Since then , Gladys has been unsuccessful at getting a boyfriend as most people she tries to romance end up avoiding her in various ways .
By the third season , it was mentioned that Gladys left Moose Rump for good and took the insurance money for the burned - down cabins and left Christina and Morgan to gain ownership of the camp .
* Tessa Netting as Hazel ( seasons 1–2 ) , the head counselor of Camp Kikiwaka and the main counselor of Weasel Cabin who is then demoted to CIT after accidentally burning down Woodchuck and Grizzly Cabins .
She is the niece of Gladys and descendant of Jedidiah Swearengen .
She seeks to steal Xander 's affection away from Emma .
* Casey Campbell as Murphy , the camp chef who is responsible for the terrible food and is Gladys ' on and off love interest .
Though gruff and gross , Murphy also ends up involved in many of the children 's hijinks .
In " By All Memes " , it was revealed that Murphy resigned from working at Camp Kikiwaka and got a job as a chef at Camp Champion , a rival camp .
* Nate Stone as Timmy , a camper who gets lost on the first day and remains " forgotten " about through " Up , Up and Away " .
* Lincoln Melcher as Griff ( season 2 ) , a juvenile delinquent who is placed in Grizzly Cabin as part of his juvenile hall 's Nature Rehabilitation Program during the second season .
* Lily Mae Silverstein as Lydia ( season 2–present ) , a camper from Weasel Cabin .
Lydia is known for a very dark look such as black lipstick and a bandana , and her aggressive demeanor similar to her followers .
NOTABLE GUEST STARS Section::::Cast and characters .
Section::::Notable guest stars .
A few cast members from Jessie reprise their roles in Bunk'd .
Cameron Boyce appears as a special guest star in " Luke 's Back " and " Luke Out Below " , reprising his role as Luke Ross .
Kevin Chamberlin appears as a special guest star in " A Bad Case of the Weasels " , reprising his role as Bertram , the butler .
Christina Moore appears as a guest star in " Mother May I ? "
reprising her role of Christina Ross .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The series is a spinoff of Jessie .
Bunk'd was renewed for a second season by Disney Channel on February 29 , 2016 .
The second season premiered on August 23 , 2016 .
The series was renewed for a third season by Disney Channel on August 31 , 2017 .
On June 1 , 2018 , it was announced that Peyton List , Karan Brar , Skai Jackson , and Miranda May would be returning for the third season and that Raphael Alejandro , Will Buie Jr. , and Mallory Mahoney would be joining the cast .
The third season premiered on Disney Channel on June 18 , 2018 .
In March 2018 , actress Skai Jackson stated in an interview that she was leaving Disney and that Bunk'd would end with the third season .
In September 2018 , it was confirmed in a report from The Hollywood Reporter that Peyton List would also leave the series after the conclusion of its third season .
On November 15 , 2018 , it was announced by Disney Channel that the series was renewed for a fourth season .
Miranda May , Mallory James Mahoney , Raphael Alejandro , and Will Buie Jr. will be returning for the fourth season , with new unannounced cast also set to star alongside them .
Peyton List , Karan Brar , and Skai Jackson will not be returning for the fourth season .
Additionally , Andi Macks Phil Baker and Erin Dunlap will take over as executive producers in the fourth season .
Production for the fourth season is scheduled to begin in March 2019 .
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
In Canada , the series premiered on Disney Channel Canada on the second day of the channel 's launch on September 2 , 2015 .
The series premiered on Disney Channels in the United Kingdom and Ireland on November 20 , 2015 , and premiered in Australia and New Zealand on January 14 , 2016 .
RATINGS
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS