NO OFFENCE
No Offence is a British television police procedural drama on Channel 4 , created by Paul Abbott .
It follows a team of detectives from Friday Street police station , a division of the Manchester Metropolitan Police ( a fictional version of the Greater Manchester Police ) .
The series stars Joanna Scanlan as the protagonist , Detective Inspector Viv Deering .
The first series focuses on the team 's investigation into the serial murders of young girls with Down syndrome .
it had been renewed for two further runs .
The second series of seven episodes began broadcasting on 4 January 2017 , and follows the investigation into Manchester crime boss Nora Attah ( Rakie Ayola ) .
It was filmed on location in Manchester .
In the UK , the first episode of No Offence launched with 2.5 million viewers , Channel 4 's biggest midweek drama launch for more than three years .
Although subsequent episodes lost overnight viewers , dropping as low as 1.2 million , the weekly consolidated series average remained at 2.5 million and finished 47 % up on Channel 4 's slot average .
In France , the first episode of No Offence aired on 29 February 2016 on France 2 and was watched by 5.46 million viewers , 20.4 % of the TV audience .
The next three episodes were shown back - to - back that evening and together achieved an average 4.6 million viewers , 20.4 % of the TV audience .
A third series was confirmed in July 2017 .
Filming took place in Manchester in March 2018 and it began broadcasting on 13 September 2018 .
The six - episode series has a political focus , with the main storyline following the attempted murder of a local politician by a far right group .
On 19 October 2018 , Paul Abbott stated in an interview that he had begun working on ideas for a potential fourth series .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In the first series , D.I. Viv Deering is dynamic but blunt in leading a team of detectives at the fictional ' Manchester Metropolitan Police ' .
D.C. Dinah Kowalska misses out on a promotion to D.S. due to a mistake , but she proceeds to uncover a link between a murder , the body of a drowned woman , and the disappearance of a third girl .
The team soon realise someone is killing girls with Down syndrome across Manchester , and , while negotiating different cases , they attempt to solve the case as more girls come into danger .
The prime suspect is killed whilst fleeing arrest , but Dinah and Viv separately conclude that Viv 's husband was also involved .
Viv burns the evidence and plans to kill rather than arrest him , but he is killed by Cathy whilst she and Dinah are holding him at Viv 's home .
With Viv they cover up their involvement before reporting the killing .
CAST MAIN CAST * Joanna Scanlan as DI Vivenne Deering ( Series 1 – ) * Elaine Cassidy as DS Dinah Kowalska ( Series 1 – ) * Alexandra Roach as DS Joy Freers ( Series 1–3 ) *
Will Mellor as DC Spike Tanner ( Series 1 – ) * Paul Ritter as Randolph Miller ( Series 1 – ) * Colin Salmon as DSI Darren Maclaren ( Series 1 ) * Sarah Solemani as DCI Christine Lickberg ( Series 2 ) * Claire Rushbrook as DCI Marilyn Marchant ( Series 3 ) * Saira Choudhry as PC Tegan Thompson ( Series 1 – )
* Tom Varey as PC Stuart O'Connell ( Series 1 – )
* Ste Johnson as PC Jonah Mitchell ( Series 1 – ) * Neet Mohan as PC Taz Ahmed ( Series 1–2 ) RECURRING CAST * Charlie May - Clark as Cathy Calvert ( Series 1—2 ) * Claudia Adshead as Donna Calvert ( Series 1—2 ) * Kate O'Flynn as Dr Peep ( Series 1 — ) * Conor MacNeill as Gavin ( Series 2- ) * Chook Sibtain as Sgt .
Keith Pankani ( Series 2 ) * Risteárd Cooper as Laurie Gaskell ( Series 1 ) * Hanna Bieniuszewicz as Magda Kowalska ( Series 1 ) * Mia Blakeley as Tessa Kowalska ( Series 1 ) ; Elizabeth Lomas as Tessa Kowalska ( Series 3 ) * Siobhan McSweeney as Ruth Cheetam ( Series 1 ) * Philip McGinley as Bob Simmons ( Series 1 ) * Ben Tavassoli as Alpha ( Series 1 ) * Daniel Ginty as Luke Hyatt ( Series 1 ) *
Hannah Walters as Connie Ball ( Series 1 ) * Rakie Ayola as Nora Attah ( Series 2 ) * Zackary Momoh as Mani Attah ( Series 2 )
* Zak Sutcliffe as Kim Garvey ( Series 2 ) * Felix Scott as DS Ewan Murray ( Series 2 )
* Lisa McGrillis as Caroline McCoy ( Series 3 ) * Neil Maskell as Dennis Caddy ( Series 3 )
* Sharon Rooney as Faye Caddy ( Series 3 )
* Tamara Lawrance as Bonnie Sands ( Series 3 ) CHARACTERS * D.I. Vivenne Deering ( Joanna Scanlan ) is a cast - iron cop with a tough - love approach to managing her team .
She is at the prime of her life and capable in her job .
However , with a high - flying career comes a disintegrating home life .
*
D.C. Dinah Kowalska ( Elaine Cassidy ) is a strong yet impulsive member of the team .
She passes over a promotion to sergeant following a stupid mistake , and it 's not long before she makes another move in following her emotions , which threatens her job .
She lives with her eccentric Polish mother Magda and her teenage daughter Tessa .
* D.S. Joy Freers ( Alexandra Roach ) is an equally brilliant detective but one who is shy of the spotlight .
Her promotion to sergeant ahead of Dinah removes her from her comfort zone ; if only she recognised her own brilliance behind her anxiety .
* D.C. Spike Tanner ( Will Mellor ) is a risk - taking headstrong man amongst the powerful women of the group .
He provides emotional glue for the group , but he is also a cheeky fun - loving guy .
* Randolph Miller ( Paul Ritter ) is an eccentric in forensics , despite the team 's general despair of his lacklustre attitude to the job .
Often hungover , it 's
lucky Randolph 's a maverick who 's amazing at his job .
* Detective Superintendent Darren Maclaren ( Colin Salmon ) is the big boss who even Viv has to answer to .
He is straight - talking but manipulative ; he is the only man who can take on Viv , and even then she 's more than a handful .
* Detective Chief Inspector Christine Lickberg ( Sarah Solemani ) is Viv 's new boss in the second series .
She 's not afraid to question Viv 's decisions , and does n't intend to make friends of the team .
*
P.C. Tegan Thompson ( Saira Choudhry ) is a tough and ambitious officer .
She refuses to suffer fools and has a good relationship with her police partner Stuart ; is there a hint of romance ?
* P.C. Stuart O'Connell ( Tom Varey ) is a smart and switched - on policeman , and Tegan 's partner .
He aims to make sergeant , but he ca n't get drawn into the trouble his colleagues like to indulge in .
*
P.C. Jonah Mitchell ( Ste Johnson ) is overweight and mischievous .
It does not stop him from throwing himself into his job with the best of them .
He is Taz 's partner .
*
P.C. Taz Ahmed ( Neet Mohan ) is a happy - go - lucky yet calming influence on the team , and Jonah 's partner .
EPISODE LIST Section::::Episode list . !
colspan="2 " rowspan="2 " Series ! rowspan="2 " Episodes !
rowspan="2 "
Originally aired !
rowspan="2 " Average ratings ( millions ) !
colspan="4 " DVD / Blu - ray release date !
Region 1 !
Region 2 !
Region 3 !
Region 4 bgcolor="#4fa8ff " align="center"1 align="center"8 align="center"5 May 2015 align="center"2.53 bgcolor="#74E387 " align="center"2
align="center"7
align="center"4 January 2017 align="center"2.69 bgcolor="#4fa8ff "
align="center"3
align="center"6 align="center"13 September 2018 align="center
" SERIES 1 ( 2015 ) SERIES 2 ( 2017 ) SERIES 3 ( 2018 ) RECEPTION AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Reception . Section::::Awards and nominations . ! Year ! ! Association ! ! Category ! ! Nominee(s ) ! !
Result RTS Craft & Design Awards
Best Music , Original Titles Vince Pope Irish Film and Television Awards Best Actress in a Lead Role - Drama Elaine Cassidy RTS Programme Awards Best Drama Series
No Offence
DVD Section::::DVD .
The complete Series 1 & 2 have been released .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS