THE MAGICIANS ( U.S. TV SERIES )
The Magicians is an American fantasy television series that airs on Syfy and is based on the novel of the same name by Lev Grossman .
Michael London , Janice Williams , John McNamara , and Sera Gamble serve as executive producers .
A 13-episode order was placed for the first season in May 2015 , and the series premiered on December 16 , 2015 , as a special preview .
In April 2017 , the series was renewed for a third season of 13 episodes , which premiered on January 10 , 2018 .
In February 2018 , the series was renewed for a fourth season of 13 episodes , which is set to premiere on January 23 , 2019 .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
Quentin Coldwater enrolls at Brakebills University for Magical Pedagogy to be trained as a magician , where he discovers that the magical world from his favorite childhood books is real and poses a danger to humanity .
Meanwhile , the life of his childhood friend Julia is derailed when she is denied entry , and she searches for magic elsewhere .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* Jason Ralph as Quentin Coldwater , a graduate student .
He enrolls at Brakebills University for Magical Pedagogy to be trained as a magician .
A lifelong fan of the Fillory and Further series , he discovers that they are in fact based in truth and pose a danger to his world .
* Stella Maeve as Julia Wicker , Quentin 's childhood friend , an Ivy League student who is not admitted to Brakebills , and is recruited by a secret magical society .
* Olivia Taylor Dudley as Alice Quinn , a naturally gifted magician whose parents are magicians and who comes from a neglected home life .
* Hale Appleman as Eliot Waugh , a student at Brakebills and senior to Quentin , with whom he is close friends .
He is a heavy drinker .
He and Margo are inseparable .
* Arjun Gupta as William " Penny " Adiyodi , Quentin 's roommate and peer .
He is a talented magician who is a telepath and " traveler " , someone who can travel between worlds .
Despite his brusque demeanor , Penny is loyal to his friends .
* Summer Bishil as Margo Hanson , equivalent to Janet from the novels .
Her name was changed to avoid confusion with other names beginning with " J " .
She is close friends with Eliot and is very charismatic .
* Rick Worthy as Henry Fogg ( season 2–present ; recurring season 1 ) , the Dean of Brakebills .
*
Jade Tailor as Kady Orloff - Diaz ( season 2–present ; recurring season 1 ) , a tough , rebellious Brakebills student who attracts Penny 's attention in and out of the classroom .
After she flees Brakebills , she joins a group of magicians led by Richard and befriends Julia .
* Brittany Curran as Fen ( season 3–present ; recurring season 2 ) , Eliot 's Fillorian wife
* Trevor Einhorn as Josh Hoberman ( season 3–present ; recurring season 2 ; guest season 1 ) , a former Brakebills student who was one of the members of a group that went missing .
RECURRING
* David Call as Pete ( season 1 ) , one of the confidants who welcome Julia into a clandestine underworld to develop her latent skills * Michael Cassidy as James ( season 1 ) , Julia 's boyfriend * Esmé Bianco as Jane Chatwin ( season 1 ; guest season 3 ) , a character from the Fillory and Further novels who also appears to Quentin , helping to guide him on his magical journey .
In the present , under the name Eliza , she had a hand in initiating Quentin 's journey into real magic .
* Rose Liston as young Jane Chatwin ( season 1 ; guest season 3 )
* Anne Dudek as Pearl Sunderland ( seasons 1–2 ) , a teacher at Brakebills and Penny 's mentor * Kacey Rohl as Marina Andrieski , one of the hedge mages who welcome Julia into a clandestine underworld to develop her latent skills .
Marina was expelled from Brakebills three months before graduation , and uses Julia to help her regain her memories of what she learned .
* Charles Mesure as Martin Chatwin / The Beast ( seasons 1–2 ) , Jane and Rupert 's brother , and former High King of Fillory .
He later resurfaced as the master magician with six fingers who has taken over Fillory and breaks through to Earth .
His head is usually magically obscured by a swarm of moths .
* Mackenzie Astin as Richard Corrigan ( season 1 ) and Reynard the Fox .
Corrigan was a magician and former member of the Free Trader Beowulf .
Reynard is a Pagan Trickster god and the son of Persephone who took over the body of Corrigan after the latter attempted to summon Persephone at the cost of his life .
* Keegan Connor Tracy as Professor Lipson , a teacher at Brakebills specializing in magical healing .
She works in the school 's infirmary .
* Garcelle Beauvais as Persephone , better known as Our Lady Underground , a goddess from Julia 's dreams * Mageina Tovah as Zelda Schiff ( season 2–present ; guest season 1 ) , the Head Librarian at the Library of the Neitherlands
* Adam DiMarco as Todd ( season 2–present ; guest season 1 ) , a student at Brakebills * Rizwan Manji as Tick Pickwick ( season 2–present ) , a royal advisor * Arlen Escarpeta as Prince Ess ( season 2–present ) , a handsome , rugged , pelt - clad man , with a sort of frat bro air of entitlement and the son of the ruler of Loria * Christopher Gorham as John Gaines ( season 2 ) , a senator who discovers he 's in possession of unusual abilities * Harvey Guillen as Benedict Pickwick ( season 2–present ) , a map - making servant of the court in Fillory * Leonard Roberts as Idri ( season 2–present ) , the King of Loria , and Eliot 's prospective lover * Imogen Tear as Shade Julia ( season 2 ) , a shade version of Julia 's younger counterpart .
* Candis Cayne as The Fairy Queen ( season 3 ; guest season 2 ) , who forces Margo into her service after Margo 's deal with the Fairies .
* Marlee Matlin as Harriet Schiff ( season 3 ; guest season 2 ) , the head of Fuzzbeat , a clickbait website that surreptitiously provides magical knowledge , and later revealed to be the daughter of the librarian Zelda Schiff * Dina Meyer as The Stone Queen ( season 3 ) , who wants Margo to marry her son
* Felicia Day as Poppy Kline ( season 3 ) , a former Brakebills student whom Quentin comes across in Fillory .
* Jaime Ray Newman as Irene McAllistair ( season 3 ) , a member of the board of Brakebills who buys the school outright when the loss of magic threatens to close the university .
* Madeleine Arthur as Fray ( season 3 ) , presented as Eliot and Fen 's grown daughter by the Fairy Queen * Anja Savcic as Skye ( season 3 ) , an enslaved Fairy * Daniel Nemes as Gavin ( season 3 )
* Jolene Purdy as Shoshana ( season 4 ) , a bright and highly emotional maenad , tasked with tending to notorious party god Bacchus .
EPISODES
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Michael London first optioned the books in 2011 , intending to develop the show at Fox .
co - writers Ashley Miller and Zack Stentz wrote the pilot , but did not get the green light .
London then redeveloped the pilot with McNamara and Gamble taking over writing duties , and took the script to Syfy , which ordered a pilot .
The pilot , directed by Mike Cahill , was filmed in New Orleans in late 2014 and wrapped in December .
Syfy picked up the show for a 13-episode first season , to be aired in 2016 .
McNamara and Gamble became executive producers .
Series production began on August 4 , 2015 , in Vancouver , and it was announced that Olivia Taylor Dudley had replaced Sosie Bacon as Alice Quinn .
It was also announced that Rick Worthy had been cast as Dean Fogg , Anne Dudek as Professor Sunderland , with Esmé Bianco also cast .
Syfy aired an advance commercial - free screening of the first episode on December 16 , 2015 ahead of its January 25 , 2016 premiere , when it was shown along with the second episode .
The show was renewed for a second season in February 2016 , and the second season premiered on January 25 , 2017 .
On April 12 , 2017 , the series was renewed for a third season of 13 episodes , which premiered on January 10 , 2018 .
On February 28 , 2018 , the series was renewed for a fourth season of 13 episodes , which is set to premiere on January 23 , 2019 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The first season received mixed to positive reviews .
On Metacritic , it holds a rating of 60/100 , based on 24 reviews .
On Rotten Tomatoes , it has a 70 % approval rating , based on 40 reviews , with an average rating of 6.4/10 .
The site 's critics ' consensus reads : " The Magicians impressive special effects and creative storytelling help compensate for a derivative premise and occasionally sluggish pace . "
The second season received positive reviews .
On Metacritic , it holds a rating of 74/100 , based on 5 reviews .
On Rotten Tomatoes , it has a 90 % approval rating , based on 20 reviews , with an average rating of 7.9/10 .
The site 's consensus reads : "
A clearer sense of purpose and extra helpings of cynicism and danger lead The Magicians to a higher level of engagement . "
The third season likewise received positive reviews .
On Rotten Tomatoes , it has a 100 % approval rating , based on 10 reviews , with an average rating of 8.4/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads : "
Surprising and wildly entertaining , The Magicians third season has more than enough tricks up its sleeve to keep viewers under its spell . "
Some critics and fans criticized the show for its brutal depiction of Julia being raped and that the rape gave her extra magical powers .
The incident was also criticized because , after Julia remembered the assault , she betrayed her friends by forming an alliance with , and literally embracing , a murderer – who is also a rape survivor .
As Lisa Weidenfeld of the AV Club put it : " the show has now suggested that the two victims of sexual assault are its villains " .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Year ! !
Awards ! !
Category ! !
Nominee(s ) ! !
Result ! !
class="unsortable " HOME MEDIA RELEASE Section::::Home media release .
The first season of The Magicians was released on DVD and Blu - Ray on July 19 , 2016 , in Region 1 .
The release included all thirteen episodes , as well as multiple special features , including deleted scenes , a gag reel , " The World of The Magicians " featurette , and UltraViolet digital copies .
The first season was made available to stream on Netflix on December 26 , 2016 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS