JACK REACHER :
NEVER GO BACK Jack Reacher :
Never Go Back is a 2016 American action thriller film , directed by Edward Zwick and written by Zwick , Richard Wenk and Marshall Herskovitz , and based on the novel
Never Go Back by Lee Child .
A standalone sequel to the 2012 film Jack Reacher , the film stars Tom Cruise , Cobie Smulders , Patrick Heusinger , Aldis Hodge , Danika Yarosh , Holt McCallany and Robert Knepper .
The plot follows Reacher going on the run with an Army Major who has been framed for espionage , as the two reveal a dark conspiracy .
Principal photography began on October 20 , 2015 , in New Orleans , and the film was released on October 21 , 2016 , in IMAX and conventional formats .
It grossed $ 162 million worldwide and received mixed reviews from critics .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
After busting a human trafficking ring , former military investigator turned vigilante drifter Jack Reacher returns to his old military headquarters to meet Major Susan Turner , whom he has been working with during his travels and has become his closest friend – only to learn from Colonel Sam Morgan that Turner has been accused of espionage and detained .
Turner 's attorney , Colonel Bob Moorcroft , reveals that there is evidence that Turner is involved in the murders of two soldiers in Afghanistan , but Reacher believes she is being framed .
Moorcroft also reveals an old acquaintance of Reacher , Candice Dutton , has filed a paternity suit against him , claiming he is the biological father of her 15-year - old daughter , Samantha Dutton .
Reacher tries to reach out to Samantha , but she rebuffs him , believing he is after her biological mother due to her past as a prostitute .
Moorcroft is later killed by an unknown assassin known as the Hunter .
Reacher is framed for Moorcroft 's murder and arrested and transported to the prison where Turner is being detained .
Two hitmen arrive to kill her , but Reacher neutralizes them , rescues her
and they escape to Morgan 's house , having deduced he is involved in the conspiracy , to extract information .
After they leave , the Hunter , revealed to be working with Morgan , kills Morgan and frames Reacher which he learns about from a friend , Sergeant Leach , when he asks her to investigate a military contractor .
Reacher and Turner uncover surveillance pictures of Samantha and surmise she is in danger , arriving at her home to find her foster parents dead and Samantha hiding in the kitchen .
Reacher and Turner decide to escort Samantha to Turner 's old private school for protection , but discover that she has her mobile phone with her and that the enemy probably knows exactly where they are .
They discard the phone and make a quick exit , during which Samantha steals a backpack from one of the students to use the credit cards .
Reacher , Turner and Samantha travel to New Orleans in search of Daniel Prudhomme , the only eye - witness to the murders for which Turner has been framed .
They find him in a derelict warehouse filled with drug addicts and learn that Prudhomme is connected to Parasource , a private military organization that is trying to cover up the murders .
Reacher contacts Turner 's friend , Captain Anthony Espin , to move Prudhomme into custody , but they are ambushed by assassins and Prudhomme is killed , while Reacher rescues a wounded Espin and finds out that the assassins are Parasource contractors .
Parasource 's CEO , General James Harkness , then sends the Hunter to capture Samantha after she uses a credit card from the backpack she stole to order room service .
Reacher and Turner , along with Espin , acting on information provided by Prudhomme , intercept a flight of weapons due to enter the country , where they confront Harkness and his men and accuse them of corruption .
Upon opening the crates , however , Espin finds weapons as declared in the flight manifest .
Before Turner can be re - arrested , Reacher opens up one of the weapons and discovers that they are filled with opium .
They learn that Harkness framed Turner , who had been investigating his activities , for the murders of two soldiers who discovered that Harkness was selling weapons to insurgents and smuggling drugs into the United States .
Espin and his men then arrest Harkness , clearing Reacher 's and Turner 's names .
The Hunter and his men locate and chase Samantha through the streets to lure Reacher into a confrontation .
Turner kills one of the assassins , whilst Reacher takes out another one on the rooftop .
The Hunter captures Samantha and threatens to kill her , but she manages to escape and steal his gun .
Reacher then tackles the Hunter onto another rooftop , briefly incapacitating both of them , and they have a vicious fight that culminates with Reacher breaking the Hunter 's arm , leg and neck , before dropping him off the rooftop .
Reacher then admits to Samantha he might be her father .
Following Harkness ' arrest , Turner is reinstated in her old position and goes back to her office , where her colleagues and a recovering Captain Espin all welcome her back .
Reacher promises to keep in touch before meeting Samantha at a diner to meet Candice , Samantha 's mother , whom Reacher surmises he will recognize , as he remembers every woman he has slept with .
Samantha reveals that the waitress that had been serving him is in fact Candice , and that Reacher can not be her father , as neither had recognized each other .
Reacher and Samantha then reluctantly part .
A short time later , while Reacher is walking along a road , he is surprised when a phone Samantha had slipped into his pocket rings .
He finds a text message from her reading , " Miss me yet ? " .
Reacher smiles as he sticks out his thumb to hitch a ride .
CAST
* Tom Cruise as Jack Reacher * Cobie Smulders as Major Susan Turner
* Aldis Hodge as Captain Anthony Espin , Turner 's friend * Danika Yarosh as Samantha Dutton , the girl Jack Reacher protects * Patrick Heusinger as the Hunter
* Holt McCallany as Colonel Sam Morgan
* Austin Hebert as Daniel Prudhomme * Robert Catrini as Colonel Bob Moorcroft , Turner 's attorney * Robert Knepper as General James Harkness * Jessica Stroup as Lieutenant Sullivan
* Madalyn Horcher as Sergeant Leach
* Teri Wyble as Mrs. Prudhomme * Lee Child as TSA Agent PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
While Jack Reacher was intended to be a tent - pole for a film series , it was initially reported that a sequel would be unlikely due to its lackluster run at the North American box office .
However , in February 2013 , a sequel became more likely after the film surpassed a gross of $ 200 million worldwide .
On December 9 , 2013 , it was announced that Paramount Pictures and Skydance Media were moving forward with the development of a second film , reportedly based on the 2013 Jack Reacher novel Never Go Back .
On May 14 , 2014 , it was reported that Tom Cruise would reprise his role as Jack Reacher .
On May 19 , 2015 , Deadline reported that Edward Zwick would re - team with Cruise , and direct the film .
Zwick wrote the script along with Marshall Herskovitz , and also Richard Wenk .
Zwick and Cruise had previously worked together on The Last Samurai .
On August 14 , 2015 , Cobie Smulders was added to the cast to play the female lead .
On September 15 , Danika Yarosh signed on to star in the film , on September 17 , Aldis Hodge was added to the cast , and on September 22 , Patrick Heusinger was cast in the villain role .
On October 20 , Holt McCallany joined the film , as did Austin Hebert .
On November 12 , 2015 , Robert Catrini joined , and on January 20 , 2016 , Robert Knepper was cast as General Harkness , a retired general , and CEO of a private military firm .
Principal photography on the film began on October 20 , 2015 , in New Orleans , Louisiana .
On November 23 , 2015 , filming took place in Baton Rouge , and in January 2016 , filming also took place in St. Francisville .
Henry Jackman composed the film 's music , making this Zwick 's first film since Blood Diamond ( 2006 ) not to be scored by James Newton Howard .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
On June 14 , 2016 , Entertainment Weekly premiered a preview of the first trailer , with Cobie Smulders introducing the footage .
The official Jack Reacher Twitter account announced that a full trailer would be released on June 22 , 2016 .
A browser game , titled Jack Reacher :
Never Stop Punching , was also released to promote the film .
In September 2015 , Paramount set Jack Reacher :
Never Go Back a release date of October 21 , 2016 .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
Jack Reacher :
Never Go Back grossed $ 58.7 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 103.4 million in other countries , for a worldwide total of $ 162.1 million , against a production budget of $ 96 million .
In the United States and Canada , the film opened alongside , Keeping Up with the Joneses and Boo !
A Madea Halloween , and was projected to gross around $ 20 million from 3,780 theaters in its opening weekend , with the studio expecting a debut of about $ 17 million .
It earned $ 1.3 million in midnight showings at 1,850 theaters , slightly above Oblivions $ 1.1 million and under Edge of Tomorrows $ 1.8 million .
For the weekend , the film opened to $ 23 million , finishing in second place , behind Boo !
A Madea Halloween .
In its second weekend , the film dropped by 58.2 % , grossing $ 9.6 million , and finishing third at the box office , behind A Madea Halloween ( $ 16.7 million ) and newcomer Inferno ( $ 15 million ) .
Outside North America , the film was released in 42 countries in conjunction with its United States and Canada debut , representing about 75 % of the film 's total marketplace internationally .
In 30 markets , the film posted the biggest opening in the series .
Outside of the United States and China , the United Kingdom and Ireland ( $ 3.3 million ) , France ( $ 2.8 million ) , Australia ( $ 2 million ) , Russia ( $ 2 million ) , Indonesia ( $ 1.9 million ) , Taiwan ( $ 1.6 million ) and the UAE ( $ 1.3 million ) posted the top openings .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 37 % , based on 219 reviews , with an average rating of 5.2/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Monotonously formulaic , Jack Reacher :
Never Go Back is one action - thriller sequel whose title also serves as a warning . "
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score 47 out of 100 , based on 43 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B+ " on an A+ to F scale , while the first film received an " A− " .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Jack Reacher :
Never Go Back was released on Digital HD on January 17 , 2017 , and on Blu - ray , Ultra HD Blu - ray and DVD on January 31 , 2017 .
By May 2018 , the film had made $ 14.5 million in domestic region video sales .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS