ANNIHILATION ( FILM )
Annihilation is a 2018 science fiction horror film written and directed by Alex Garland , based on the novel of the same name by Jeff VanderMeer .
It stars Natalie Portman , Jennifer Jason Leigh , Gina Rodriguez , Tessa Thompson , Tuva Novotny and Oscar Isaac .
The story follows a group of military scientists who enter " The Shimmer " , a mysterious quarantined zone of mutating landscapes and transforming creatures .
Annihilation was released theatrically in Canada and the United States by Paramount Pictures on February 23 , 2018 and in China on April 13 , 2018 .
Across all three countries , it grossed $ 43 million against a production budget between $ 40–55 million .
It was released digitally by Netflix in a number of other countries on March 12 , 2018 .
The film received praise for its visuals , acting , direction and thought - provoking story .
According to Jonathan Pile of Empire magazine , the film addresses " depression , grief and the human propensity for self - destruction " .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
At " Area X " , a government facility on the southern coast of the US , Lena , a cellular - biology professor and former soldier , is in quarantine .
She undergoes a debriefing about a four - month expedition into an anomalous iridescent electromagnetic field dubbed " the Shimmer " , of which she and her husband , Kane , are the only survivors .
In flashback , Kane , an Army Special Forces soldier , appears in their home after having disappeared on a mission nearly a year ago .
He remembers nothing of that time and suddenly falls very ill .
A government security force intercepts Kane 's ambulance and transports him and Lena to Area X , near where the Shimmer had begun to spread three years earlier .
A psychologist , Dr. Ventress , explains that military teams , including Kane 's , have ventured into the Shimmer to attempt to reach the lighthouse where the phenomenon first appeared .
Kane is the only person to have ever returned from an expedition .
Lena volunteers to join Ventress on a research expedition consisting of two scientists , Josie and Cassie , and a paramedic , Anya .
On the expedition , guidance technology fails , the expedition members realize they are unable to remember extended stretches of time , and a mutated alligator attacks Josie .
The team rescues Josie and learns that the alligator shows signs of being hybridized with a shark .
At an abandoned military base , the team discovers evidence of Kane 's expedition along with a memory card left for them .
A video on the card shows Kane cutting open the stomach of a fellow expedition member while he was still alive , revealing that his intestines have begun to wriggle in a snake - like manner .
That night , the base 's perimeter fence is torn open , prompting the expedition to investigate .
Suddenly , a mutated bear drags Cassie away ; the following morning , the team finds one of her boots containing her shorn ankle and foot .
Lena searches further , alone , and discovers Cassie 's mutilated corpse .
As the team continues toward the lighthouse at the center of the Shimmer , they find a decayed settlement with human - shaped plants outside it .
Josie says she thinks the Shimmer is acting on organisms in the manner of a prism , distorting and refracting DNA in the same way that a prism refracts light .
The expedition members realize they are slowly changing as well .
That night , Anya descends into a psychotic state , attacking and restraining the other team members .
As she is threatening them , Anya hears what sounds like Cassie crying for help outside and investigates .
The bear that killed Cassie enters the house , its roar imitating Cassie 's dying screams .
It kills Anya and attacks Lena before Josie shoots it dead .
Ventress leaves Lena and Josie behind , and sets out to complete the journey while she still can .
Josie muses that she does n't want to continue and begins to grow flowers from her body .
She walks away from Lena and disappears among the human - shaped plants .
Lena reaches the lighthouse and goes inside , finding an incinerated corpse , a video - camera , and a hole in the floor .
Footage on the camera shows Kane ranting about the Shimmer 's effects on him .
He urges the cameraman to find Lena , then commits suicide with a white - phosphorus grenade , after which his doppelgänger walks into view .
Lena descends into the hole in the floor and finds Ventress , who has also begun to mutate ; she disintegrates into a fiery nebulous structure that absorbs a drop of blood from Lena 's face and creates a humanoid being .
Lena tricks the humanoid , which has been mirroring her movements , into burning itself alive with one of the phosphorus grenades .
The blazing being sets the rest of the lighthouse ablaze , and the flames spread to engulf the various other constructs of the Shimmer , causing them to collapse as burning embers and the Shimmer to dissipate into nothingness .
Lena is sent back to Area X , where she is quarantined and debriefed about the Shimmer in front of a battery of observing doctors .
Lena surmises that the Shimmer was not necessarily aiming to destroy Earth , but was instead making something new , although Lena was unsure what it was making .
She is brought to Kane , who recovered rapidly when the Shimmer ceased to exist .
She asks him if he is the " real " Kane , to which he replies , " I do n't think so . "
He asks her if she is Lena , but she does not answer him .
Kane 's doppelgänger and Lena embrace , and their irises shift colors .
CAST
* Natalie Portman as Lena * Kristen McGarrity as Lena 's double * Jennifer Jason Leigh as Dr. Ventress
* Gina Rodriguez as Anya Thorensen * Tessa Thompson as Josie Radek
* Tuva Novotny as Cassie " Cass " Sheppard * Oscar Isaac as Kane
* Benedict Wong as Lomax * Sonoya Mizuno as Katie * Mizuno also portrays the humanoid * David Gyasi as Daniel PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In March 2013 , it was announced that Paramount Pictures and Scott Rudin Productions had acquired the film rights to Annihilation , the first novel in Jeff VanderMeer 's Southern Reach Trilogy , and that the film would be produced by Scott Rudin and Eli Bush .
Alex Garland was hired to adapt and direct the film the next year .
WRITING Section::::Writing .
Garland revealed to Creative Screenwriting that his adaptation was necessarily based on only the first novel in the trilogy :
Garland 's film is " an adaptation which was a memory of the book " , rather than book - referenced screenwriting , with the intention of capturing the " dreamlike nature " and tone of his experience reading VanderMeer 's novel .
Rather than trying to directly adapt the book Garland deliberately took the story in his own direction , with VanderMeer 's permission .
Garland did not read the other two books when they arrived , as he was concerned he would need to revise his script .
Others informed him of the elements of the books , and he expressed surprise at some of the correlations .
Some critics have noted correlations between the film and other science fiction works .
Nerdist Industries ' Kyle Anderson commented that the film has little to do with the novel that it was based on , and is similar to H. P. Lovecraft 's 1927 short story " The Colour Out of Space " , about a meteor that lands in a swamp and unleashes a plague .
Chris McCoy of the Memphis Flyer also found the film reminiscent of " The Colour Out of Space " as well as the novel Roadside Picnic ( 1971 ) and its film adaptation , Stalker ( 1979 ) .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography was underway by April 2016 , when actor David Gyasi was added to the cast .
Location filming by Lighthouse Pictures Ltd occurred starting in late April in South Forest , Windsor Great Park .
Some test shooting had already been done in St. Marks , Florida , but the vegetation in the area turned out to be too dense to give any depth perception on screen .
On May 9 , 2016 , cinematographer Rob Hardy began sharing pictures from the set of the film .
On July 13 and 14 , filming took place at Holkham Pines in North Norfolk .
Shooting was completed that month .
The visual effect team was made up of many of Garland 's collaborators from his previous film , Ex Machina , including VFX Supervisor Andrew Whitehurst , lead VFX house Double Negative and Milk VFX , plus special makeup effects by Tristan Versluis .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Due to a poorly received test screening , David Ellison , a financier and producer at Paramount , became concerned that the film was " too intellectual " and " too complicated " , and demanded changes to make it appeal to a wider audience , including making Portman 's character more sympathetic , and changing the ending .
Producer Scott Rudin sided with the director , who did not want to alter the film .
Rudin , who had final cut privilege , defended the film and refused to take notes from Ellison .
On December 7 , 2017 , it was announced that due to the clashes between Rudin and Ellison , and the shift in Paramount 's leadership , a deal was struck allowing Netflix to distribute the film internationally .
According to this deal , Paramount would handle the American , Canadian and Chinese release , while Netflix would begin streaming the film in other territories 17 days later .
Prior to its release , the film drew criticism for the casting of Natalie Portman and Jennifer Jason Leigh , who are both Jewish , as characters who are , in the later books , described as Asian and of half Native American descent , respectively .
Garland stated that none of the five female characters ' ethnicity is mentioned in the first book , which was the only one of the trilogy he had read , and that the script was complete before the second book was published .
He cast the characters based on his reaction only to the actors he had met in the casting process , or actors he had worked with before .
The film was released theatrically in the United States on February 23 , 2018 , by Paramount Pictures , and digitally in other markets on March 12 , 2018 , by Netflix .
Garland expressed his disappointment with the decision to coincide digital distribution with theatrical , saying " We made the film for cinema . " HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Annihilation was released on Digital HD on May 22 , 2018 , and on Ultra HD Blu - ray , Blu - ray and DVD on May 29 , 2018 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
, Annihilation has grossed $ 32.7 million in the United States and Canada and $ 10.3 million in China , for a worldwide total of $ 43 million , against a production budget of $ 40 - 55 million .
It has been branded one of the biggest box office bombs of 2018 .
In North America , Annihilation was released in alongside Game Night and Every Day , and was projected to gross $ 10–12 million from 2,012 theaters in its opening weekend .
The film made $ 3.9 million on its first day ( including $ 900,000 from Thursday night previews at 1,850 theaters ) .
It ended up making $ 11 million over the weekend , finishing fourth , behind Black Panther , Game Night and Peter Rabbit .
In its second weekend the film dropped 49 % to $ 5.9 million , falling to 6th place .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 88 % , based on 256 reviews , and an average rating of 7.7/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Annihilation backs up its sci - fi visual wonders and visceral genre thrills with an impressively ambitious — and surprisingly strange — exploration of challenging themes that should leave audiences pondering long after the end credits roll .
"
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 79 out of 100 , based on reviews from 51 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " C " on an A+ to F scale , while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave it a 71 % overall positive score .
Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun - Times gave the film 4 out of 4 stars , praising it for taking risks , and saying : " Kudos to Garland and the cast , but bravo to Scott Rudin as well .
Apparently you knew a masterpiece when you saw it , and you made sure we were able to see it as well .
" Writing for Rolling Stone , Peter Travers complimented the cast and Garland 's writing and direction , giving the film 3.5 stars out of 4 and saying , " Garland need make no apologies for Annihilation .
It 's a bracing brainteaser with the courage of its own ambiguity .
You work out the answers in your own head , in your own time , in your own dreams , where the best sci - fi puzzles leave things . "
Conversely , The Economist described the film as " tightrope - walking the fine line between open - ended , mind - expanding mystery and lethargic , pretentious twaddle " , but praised its final half hour .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS