VERTEBRA
In the vertebrate spinal column , each vertebra is an irregular bone with a complex structure composed of bone and some hyaline cartilage , the proportions of which vary according to the segment of the backbone and the species of vertebrate .
The basic configuration of a vertebra varies ; the large part is the body , and the central part is the centrum .
The upper and lower surfaces of the vertebra body give attachment to the intervertebral discs .
The posterior part of a vertebra forms a vertebral arch , in eleven parts , consisting of two pedicles , two laminae , and seven processes .
The laminae give attachment to the ligamenta flava ( ligaments of the spine ) .
There are vertebral notches formed from the shape of the pedicles , which form the intervertebral foramina when the vertebrae articulate .
These foramina are the entry and exit conducts for the spinal nerves .
The body of the vertebra and the vertebral arch form the vertebral foramen , the larger , central opening that accommodates the spinal canal , which encloses and protects the spinal cord .
Vertebrae articulate with each other to give strength and flexibility to the spinal column , and the shape at their back and front aspects determines the range of movement .
Structurally , vertebrae are essentially alike across the vertebrate species , with the greatest difference seen between an aquatic animal and other vertebrate animals .
As such , vertebrates take their name from the vertebrae that compose the vertebral column .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
Each vertebra is an irregular bone .
The size of the vertebrae varies according to placement in the vertebral column , spinal loading , posture and pathology .
Along the length of the spine the vertebrae change to accommodate different needs related to stress and mobility .
Every vertebra has a body , which consists of a large anterior middle portion called the centrum ( plural centra ) and a posterior vertebral arch , also called a neural arch .
The body is composed of cancellous bone , which is the spongy type of osseous tissue , whose micro - anatomy has been specifically studied within the pedicle bones .
This cancellous bone is in turn , covered by a thin coating of cortical bone ( or compact bone ) , the hard and dense type of osseous tissue .
The vertebral arch and processes have thicker coverings of cortical bone .
The upper and lower surfaces of the body of the vertebra are flattened and rough in order to give attachment to the intervertebral discs .
These surfaces are the vertebral endplates which are in direct contact with the intervertebral discs and form the joint .
The endplates are formed from a thickened layer of the cancellous bone of the vertebral body , the top layer being more dense .
The endplates function to contain the adjacent discs , to evenly spread the applied loads , and to provide anchorage for the collagen fibers of the disc .
They also act as a semi - permeable interface for the exchange of water and solutes .
The vertebral arch is formed by pedicles and laminae .
Two pedicles extend from the sides of the vertebral body to join the body to the arch .
The pedicles are short thick processes that extend , one from each side , posteriorly , from the junctions of the posteriolateral surfaces of the centrum , on its upper surface .
From each pedicle a broad plate , a lamina , projects backwards and medialwards to join and complete the vertebral arch and form the posterior border of the vertebral foramen , which completes the triangle of the vertebral foramen .
The upper surfaces of the laminae are rough to give attachment to the ligamenta flava .
These ligaments connect the laminae of adjacent vertebra along the length of the spine from the level of the second cervical vertebra .
Above and below the pedicles are shallow depressions called vertebral notches ( superior and inferior ) .
When the vertebrae articulate the notches align with those on adjacent vertebrae and these form the openings of the intervertebral foramina .
The foramina allow the entry and exit of the spinal nerves from each vertebra , together with associated blood vessels .
The articulating vertebrae provide a strong pillar of support for the body .
There are seven processes projecting from the vertebra ; a spinous process , two transverse processes , and four articular processes .
A major part of a vertebra is a backward extending spinous process ( sometimes called the neural spine ) which projects centrally .
This process points dorsally and caudally from the junction of the laminae .
The spinous process serves to attach muscles and ligaments .
The two transverse processes , one on each side of the vertebral body project from either side at the point where the lamina joins the pedicle , between the superior and inferior articular processes .
They also serve for the attachment of muscles and ligaments , in particular the intertransverse ligaments .
There is a facet on each of the transverse processes of thoracic vertebrae which articulates with the tubercle of the rib .
A facet on each side of the thoracic vertebral body articulates with the head of the rib .
There are superior and inferior articular facet joints on each side of the vertebra , which serve to restrict the range of movement possible .
These facets are joined by a thin portion of the vertebral arch called the pars interarticularis .
The transverse process of a lumbar vertebra is also sometimes called the costal or costiform process because it corresponds to a rudimentary rib ( costa ) which , as opposed to the thorax , is not developed in the lumbar region .
REGIONAL
VARIATION
Section::::Regional variation .
Vertebrae take their names from the regions of the vertebral column that they occupy .
There are thirty - three vertebrae in the human vertebral column — seven cervical vertebrae , twelve thoracic vertebrae , five lumbar vertebrae , five fused sacral vertebrae forming the sacrum and three to five coccygeal vertebrae , forming the coccyx .
The regional vertebrae increase in size as they progress downwards but become smaller in the coccyx .
CERVICAL VERTEBRAE Section::::Cervical vertebrae .
There are seven cervical vertebrae ( but eight cervical spinal nerves ) , designated C1 through C7 .
These bones are , in general , small and delicate .
Their spinous processes are short ( with the exception of C2 and C7 , which have palpable spinous processes ) .
C1 is also called the atlas , and C2 is also called the axis .
The structure of these vertebrae is the reason why the neck and head have a large range of motion .
The atlanto - occipital joint allows the skull to move up and down , while the atlanto - axial joint allows the upper neck to twist left and right .
The axis also sits upon the first intervertebral disc of the spinal column .
Cervical vertebrae possess transverse foramina to allow for the vertebral arteries to pass through on their way to the foramen magnum to end in the circle of Willis .
These are the smallest , lightest vertebrae and the vertebral foramina are triangular in shape .
The spinous processes are short and often bifurcated ( the spinous process of C7 , however , is not bifurcated , and is substantially longer than that of the other cervical spinous processes ) .
The atlas differs from the other vertebrae in that it has no body and no spinous process .
It has instead a ring - like form , having an anterior and a posterior arch and two lateral masses .
At the outside centre points of both arches there is a tubercle , an anterior tubercle and a posterior tubercle , for the attachment of muscles .
The front surface of the anterior arch is convex and its anterior tubercle gives attachment to the longus colli muscle .
The posterior tubercle is a rudimentary spinous process and gives attachment to the rectus capitis posterior minor muscle .
The spinous process is small so as not to interfere with the movement between the atlas and the skull .
On the under surface is a facet for articulation with the dens of the axis .
Specific to the cervical vertebra is the transverse foramen ( also known as foramen transversarium ) .
This is an opening on each of the transverse processes which gives passage to the vertebral artery and vein and a sympathetic nerve plexus .
On the cervical vertebrae other than the atlas , the anterior and posterior tubercles are on either side of the transverse foramen on each transverse process .
The anterior tubercle on the sixth cervical vertebra is called the carotid tubercle because it separates the carotid artery from the vertebral artery .
There is a hook - shaped uncinate process on the side edges of the top surface of the bodies of the third to the seventh cervical vertebrae , and also of the first thoracic vertebra .
Together with the vertebral disc , this uncinate process prevents a vertebra from sliding backwards off the vertebra below it and limits lateral flexion ( side - bending ) .
Luschka 's joints involve the vertebral uncinate processes .
The spinous process on C7 is distinctively long and gives the name vertebra prominens to this vertebra .
Also a cervical rib can develop from C7 as an anatomical variation .
The term cervicothoracic is often used to refer to the cervical and thoracic vertebrae together , and sometimes also their surrounding areas .
THORACIC
VERTEBRAE
Section::::Thoracic vertebrae .
The twelve thoracic vertebrae and their transverse processes have surfaces that articulate with the ribs .
Some rotation can occur between the thoracic vertebrae , but their connection with the rib cage prevents much flexion or other movement .
They may also be known as ' dorsal vertebrae ' , in the human context .
The vertebral bodies are roughly heart - shaped and are about as wide anterio - posterioly as they are in the transverse dimension .
Vertebral foramina are roughly circular in shape .
The top surface of the first thoracic vertebra has a hook - shaped uncinate process , just like the cervical vertebrae .
The term thoracolumbar is sometimes used to refer to the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae together , and sometimes also their surrounding areas .
The thoracic vertebrae attach to ribs and so have articular facets specific to them ; these are the superior , transverse and inferior costal facets .
As the vertebrae progress down the spine they increase in size to match up with the adjoining lumbar section .
LUMBAR VERTEBRAE Section::::Lumbar vertebrae .
The five lumbar vertebrae are the largest of the vertebrae , their robust construction being necessary for supporting greater weight than the other vertebrae .
They allow significant flexion , extension and moderate lateral flexion ( side - bending ) .
The discs between these vertebrae create a natural lumbar lordosis ( a spinal curvature that is concave posteriorly).This is due to the difference in thickness between the front and back parts of the intervertebral discs .
The lumbar vertebrae are located between the ribcage and the pelvis and are the largest of the vertebrae .
The pedicles are strong as are the laminae and the spinous process is thick and broad .
The vertebral foramen is large and triangular .
The transverse processes are long and narrow and three tubercles can be seen on them .
These are a lateral cosiform process , a mammillary process and an accessory process .
The superior , or upper tubercle is the mammillary process which connects with the superior articular process .
The multifidus muscle attaches to the mammillary process and this muscle extends through the length of the vertebral column , giving support .
The inferior , or lower tubercle is the accessory process and this is found at the back part of the base of the transverse process .
The term lumbosacral is often used to refer to the lumbar and sacral vertebrae together , and sometimes includes their surrounding areas .
SACRUM Section::::Sacrum .
There are five sacral vertebrae ( S1–S5 ) which are fused in maturity , into one large bone , the sacrum , with no intervertebral discs .
The sacrum with the ilium forms a sacroiliac joint on each side of the pelvis , which articulates with the hips .
COCCYX Section::::Coccyx .
The last three to five coccygeal vertebrae ( but usually four ) ( Co1–Co5 ) make up the tailbone or coccyx .
There are no intervertebral discs .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Somites form in the early embryo and some of these develop into sclerotomes .
The sclerotomes form the vertebrae as well as the rib cartilage and part of the occipital bone .
From their initial location within the somite , the sclerotome cells migrate medially towards the notochord .
These cells meet the sclerotome cells from the other side of the paraxial mesoderm .
The lower half of one sclerotome fuses with the upper half of the adjacent one to form each vertebral body .
From this vertebral body , sclerotome cells move dorsally and surround the developing spinal cord , forming the vertebral arch .
Other cells move distally to the costal processes of thoracic vertebrae to form the ribs .
FUNCTION Section::::Function .
Functions of vertebrae include : * Support .
The vertebrae function in the skeletomuscular system by forming the vertebral column to support the body .
* * Protection .
Vertebrae contain a vertebral foramen for the passage of the spinal canal and its enclosed spinal cord and covering meninges .
They also afford sturdy protection for the spinal cord .
The upper and lower surfaces of the centrum are flattened and rough in order to give attachment to the intervertebral discs .
* * Movement .
The vertebrae also provide the openings , the intervertebral foramina which allow the entry and exit of the spinal nerves .
Similarly to the surfaces of the centrum , the upper and lower surfaces of the fronts of the laminae are flattened and rough to give attachment to the ligamenta flava .
Working together in the vertebral column their sections provide controlled movement and flexibility .
*
* Feeding the Intervertebral discs , through the reflex ( hyaline ligament ) plate that separates the cancellous bone of the vertebral body from each disk .
* CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE Section::::Clinical significance .
There are a number of congenital vertebral anomalies , mostly involving variations in the shape or number of vertebrae , and many of which are unproblematic .
Others though can cause compression of the spinal cord .
Wedge - shaped vertebrae , called hemivertebrae can cause an angle to form in the spine which can result in the spinal curvature diseases of kyphosis , scoliosis and lordosis .
Severe cases can cause spinal cord compression .
Block vertebrae where some vertebrae have become fused can cause problems .
Spina bifida can result from the incomplete formation of the vertebral arch .
Spondylolysis is a defect in the pars interarticularis of the vertebral arch .
In most cases this occurs in the lowest of the lumbar vertebrae ( L5 ) , but may also occur in the other lumbar vertebrae , as well as in the thoracic vertebrae .
Spinal disc herniation , more commonly called a slipped disc , is the result of a tear in the outer ring ( anulus fibrosus ) of the intervertebral disc , which lets some of the soft gel - like material , the nucleus pulposus , bulge out in a hernia .
This may be treated by a minimally - invasive endoscopic procedure called Tessys method .
A laminectomy is a surgical operation to remove the laminae in order to access the spinal canal .
The removal of just part of a lamina is called a laminotomy .
A pinched nerve caused by pressure from a disc , vertebra or scar tissue might be remedied by a foraminotomy to broaden the intervertebral foramina and relieve pressure .
It can also be caused by a foramina stenosis , a narrowing of the nerve opening , as a result of arthritis .
Another condition is spondylolisthesis when one vertebra slips forward onto another .
The reverse of this condition is retrolisthesis where one vertebra slips backwards onto another .
The vertebral pedicle is often used as a radiographic marker and entry point in vertebroplasty , kyphoplasty , and spinal fusion procedures .
The arcuate foramen is a common anatomical variation more frequently seen in females .
It is a bony bridge found on the first cervical vertebra , the atlas where it covers the groove for the vertebral artery .
Degenerative disc disease is a condition usually associated with ageing in which one or more discs degenerate .
This can often be a painfree condition but can also be very painful .
OTHER ANIMALS
Section::::Other animals .
In other animals the vertebrae take the same regional names except for the coccygeal – in animals with tails the separate vertebrae are usually called the caudal vertebrae .
Because of the different types of locomotion and support needed between the aquatic and other vertebrates , the vertebrae between them show the most variation , though basic features are shared .
The spinous processes which are backward extending are directed upwards in animals without an erect stance .
These processes can be very large in the larger animals as they attach to the muscles and ligaments of the body .
In the elephant the vertebrae are connected by tight joints , which limit the backbone 's flexibility .
Spinous processes are exaggerated in some animals , such as the extinct Dimetrodon and Spinosaurus , where they form a sailback or finback .
Vertebrae with saddle - shaped articular surfaces on their bodies , are called " heterocoelous " , which allows vertebrae to flex both vertically and horizontally , while preventing twisting motions .
Such vertebrae are found in the necks of birds and some turtles .
In many species , though not in mammals , the cervical vertebrae bear ribs .
In many groups , such as lizards and saurischian dinosaurs , the cervical ribs are large ; in birds , they are small and completely fused to the vertebrae .
The transverse processes of mammals are homologous to the cervical ribs of other amniotes .
In the whale the cervical vertebrae are typically fused , an adaptation trading flexibility for stability during swimming .
All mammals except manatees and sloths have seven cervical vertebrae , whatever the length of the neck .
This includes seemingly unlikely animals such as the giraffe , the camel , and the blue whale , for example .
Birds usually have more cervical vertebrae with most having a highly flexible neck consisting of 13–25 vertebrae .
In all mammals the thoracic vertebrae are connected to ribs and their bodies differ from the other regional vertebrae due to the presence of facets .
Each vertebra has a facet on each side of the vertebral body which articulates with the head of a rib .
There is also a facet on each of the transverse processes which articulates with the tubercle of a rib .
The number of thoracic vertebrae varies considerably across the species .
Most marsupials have thirteen , but koalas only have eleven .
The norm is twelve to fifteen in mammals , ( twelve in the human ) , though there are from eighteen to twenty in the horse , tapir , rhinoceros and elephant .
In certain sloths there is an extreme number of twenty - five and at the other end only nine in the cetacean .
There are fewer lumbar vertebrae in chimpanzees and gorillas , which have three in contrast to the five in the genus Homo .
This reduction in number gives an inability of the lumbar spine to lordose but gives an anatomy that favours vertical climbing , and hanging ability more suited to feeding locations in high - canopied regions .
The bonobo differs by having four lumbar vertebrae .
Caudal vertebrae are the bones that make up the tails of vertebrates .
They range in number from a few to fifty , depending on the length of the animal 's tail .
In humans and other tailless primates , they are called the coccygeal vertebrae , number from three to five and are fused into the coccyx .
ADDITIONAL IMAGES SEE ALSO
* Limbus vertebra * Functional spinal unit
* Pott disease
* Scheuermann 's disease
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * – Axis & Atlas
Articulated , Posterior View
*
The shapes of the articulating ends of vertebrae – University of the Cumberlands