THE RANCH ( TV SERIES )
The Ranch is an American sitcom web television series starring Ashton Kutcher , Danny Masterson , Debra Winger , Elisha Cuthbert , and Sam Elliott that debuted in 2016 on Netflix .
The show takes place on the fictional Iron River Ranch in the fictitious small town of Garrison , Colorado ; detailing the life of the Bennetts , a dysfunctional family consisting of two brothers , their rancher father , and his divorced wife and local bar owner .
While the opening sequence shows scenes from Norwood and Ouray , Colorado and surrounding
Ouray and San Miguel Counties , The Ranch is filmed on a sound stage in front of a live audience in Burbank , California .
Each season consists of 20 episodes broken up into two parts , each containing 10 episodes .
All episodes are named after American country music songs , predominantly Kenny Chesney in part one , George Strait in part two , Tim McGraw in part three , Garth Brooks in part four , Dolly Parton in part five , and Alabama in part six .
The first ten episodes premiered on April 1 , 2016 , the second batch of ten episodes premiered on October 7 , 2016 .
In April 2016 , Netflix renewed The Ranch for a second season of 20 episodes , the first half of which premiered on June 16 , 2017 , and the second half was released on December 15 , 2017 .
On July 4 , 2017 , Netflix announced through its official
The Ranch Twitter account that the show had been renewed for a third season of 20 episodes , the first ten of which aired on June 15 , 2018 .
In December 2017 , a week before the release of the second - half of the second season , it was announced that Masterson had been written out of the show following multiple sexual assault allegations made against him , and appeared in only the first 10 episodes of the third season .
On October 31 , 2018 , Netflix renewed the series for a fourth season .
CAST MAIN * Ashton Kutcher as Colt Bennett , a former high school and college football star who pursued a professional career with mixed success ,
never finding regular playing time or stardom , but hanging on in backup roles and on practice squads .
He returns to his hometown after a fifteen - year absence so that he can take part in a tryout with a semi - pro team , and decides to stay and help his father and older brother on their family ranch .
Colt is frequently the butt of their jokes , particularly when it comes to his ranching skills ( or lack thereof ) and his disappointing pro football career .
He is a heavy drinker and has a penchant for not using common sense , but he seems to have a heart of gold and tries to do right by others .
Based on his various T - shirts and dialogue throughout the first season , it 's implied that Colt has played for the Barcelona Dragons , San Jose SaberCats , Spokane Shock , Orlando Predators , Nebraska Danger , Iowa Barnstormers , Green Bay Blizzard , Minnesota Axemen , Portland Forest Dragons and Philadelphia Soul .
Dialogue and team gear also indicates that he was a member of teams in Canada , notably the Ottawa Redblacks and fictional Saskatoon Cold ( " Like the Miami Heat ... only cold " ) .
He has also played on teams in Alaska and was a member of the Buffalo Bills practice squad .
In the first episode of the series , Colt reveals that he was " the back up to the back up to the back up " for the Florida State team that won the college football championship in 1999 .
He later marries Abby , his high school sweetheart , and they become the parents a daughter they name Peyton .
* Danny Masterson as Jameson " Rooster " Bennett ( seasons 1–3 ) , Colt 's older brother .
He has lived and worked on the ranch since Colt left to follow his football career , at times showing a bitter attitude for having to accept the responsibility while Colt pursued his dream .
Despite living in Colt 's shadow he is far more competent on the ranch as well as a more level headed thinker .
He has , however , been just as irresponsible as Colt , drinking too much and sleeping around .
In the first half of Season 3 , Rooster gets into hot water with Mary 's intimidating boyfriend , and in the second episode of Part 6 , it is discovered that Rooster 's motorcycle went off the side of dangerous road and Rooster is missing or presumed dead .
* Debra Winger as Maggie Bennett , owner of Maggie 's , and Colt and Rooster 's mother .
Maggie is divorced from Beau and lives in a trailer behind the bar she owns .
Much more lighthearted and caring than Beau , her company and advice is often sought out by the boys on how to deal with problems , especially those concerning their father .
Maggie is something of a hippie and is an avid marijuana smoker .
* Sam Elliott as Beau Bennett , Maggie 's ex - husband , and Colt and Rooster 's father .
A Vietnam War veteran , he has worked the ranch since returning from the war and taking it over after his father died .
He is difficult to get along with , perpetually annoyed with everyone and everything .
He has an estranged relationship with Rooster and Colt .
He detests many modern amenities and is easily angered by his sons ' antics .
Beau appears to be a Republican with a special affinity for Ronald Reagan but at times seems to despise all politicians regardless of affiliation .
* Elisha Cuthbert as Abby Phillips - Bennett ( season 2–present ; recurring , season 1 ) , a Garrison High School history teacher and Colt 's high school sweetheart and current wife .
Abby was in a five - year relationship with Kenny and was briefly engaged to him , but ultimately she broke it off to re - start her relationship with Colt .
She and Colt are now married and have a baby girl , Peyton .
RECURRING
* Barry Corbin as Dale Rivers , a hearing - impaired veterinarian and close friend of Beau 's * Grady Lee Richmond as Hank , a regular Maggie 's patron * Bret Harrison as Kenny Ballard , a Courtyard by Marriott manager and Abby 's ex - fiancé * Megyn Price as Mary Roth , a Cracker Barrel waitress and Rooster 's ex - girlfriend * Kelli Goss as Heather Roth , Mary 's younger daughter and Colt 's ex - girlfriend , was pregnant with their child .
* Molly McCook as Darlene Roth , Mary 's older daughter * Kathy Baker as Joanne , Beau 's girlfriend and Mary 's friend / coworker at the Cracker Barrel * Ethan Suplee as " Beer Pong " Billy Tompkins , a police officer and high school friend of Colt and Rooster 's * Aimee Teegarden as Nikki , Heather 's friend and Billy 's fiancée
* Chasty Ballesteros as Tanya Showers , a sexy weather reporter and Kenny 's current girlfriend
* Laura Vallejo as Maria , a Maggie 's waitress * Sharon Lawrence as Brenda Sanders , a widowed hairdresser who befriended Beau when he and Maggie separated * Maggie Lawson as Jen , an engineer who wants to build a pipeline underneath the Bennett Ranch and Rooster 's love interest .
* Wendie Malick as Lisa Neumann , owner of Neumann 's Hill
* Dax Shepard as Luke Matthews , the son of Beau 's late brother Greg SPECIAL GUESTS
* Jon Cryer as Bill Jensen , a loan officer and former high school football referee ( Seasons 1 - 2 )
* Wilmer Valderrama as Umberto , a former Iron River ranch hand , former employee of Neumann 's Hill at the My Little Pony Ranch .
He is Rooster and Colt 's friend .
Currently deported .
( Seasons 1 - 2 ) * Martin Mull as Jerry , Maggie 's sometimes acid - tripping attorney * John Amos as Ed Bishop , a longtime family friend of the Bennetts and a Neumann 's Hill employee ( Seasons 1 - 2 )
* Thomas F. Wilson as Coach Fitzgerald , the Garrison High School head football coach ( Season 1 )
* Debra Jo Rupp as Janice Phillips , Abby 's mother ( Seasons 2 - 3 )
* Jim Beaver as Chuck Phillips , Abby 's father , who like Janice is disdainful of Abby 's relationship with Colt ( Seasons 2 - 3 ) * Conchata Ferrell as Shirley ( Season 2 )
* Lou Diamond Phillips as Clint , a traveling musician attracted to Maggie ( Season 2 )
* Kurtwood Smith as Sam Peterson , neighbor of the Iron River Ranch ( Seasons 2 - 3 )
* Nancy Travis as Karen , Maggie 's estranged sister ( Season 3 ) CAMEOS
* Joe Firstman
* Pearl Charles *
Kurt Neumann * Bukka Allen * Sam Hawksley
* Thomas Rhett * Lou Diamond Phillips
[ Clint :
A traveling musician ]
3 episodes - Part 3 EPISODES SERIES
OVERVIEW SEASON 1 ( 2016 )
SEASON 2 ( 2017 )
SEASON 3 ( 2018 )
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The Ranch has earned positive reviews from critics .
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes gives the series an average approval rating of 70 % ( 60 % for season 1 , 67 % for season 2 ) based on 141 reviews , with an average rating of 4.5/5 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , "
A formulaic set - up and predictable plotting are elevated by The Ranch 's surprising sensitivity and strong performances .
"
Metacritic gave the series a score of 56 out of 100 , based on 20 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Writing for Slate in a positive review , television critic Willa Paskin wrote of the show , " The Ranch is a red - state sitcom , though it takes place in the swing state of Colorado , and is good enough to be watched by people of any political affiliation " and " The goodness sneaks up on you . "
Los Angeles Times wrote : "
[ Elliott and Winger 's ] scenes together , as restrained as they are , are the show 's most emotionally resonant .
You will want to check them out . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS