FINAL FANTASY VII REMAKE Final Fantasy VII Remake is an upcoming action role - playing game developed and published by Square Enix for the PlayStation 4 .
It is a remake of the 1997 PlayStation game Final Fantasy VII , retelling the original story following mercenary Cloud Strife as he and eco - terrorist group AVALANCHE battle against the corrupt Shinra megacorporation , and the rogue former Shinra soldier Sephiroth .
Gameplay is planned to be a fusion of real - time action similar to Dissidia Final Fantasy , and strategic elements , and the game will be released as a multipart series .
Rumors and demands for a remake of VII existed for many years , but multiple reasons were given for why the project was not being developed .
Four key original staff members returned to help with Remake : original character designer Tetsuya Nomura returned to both director and main character designer , original director Yoshinori Kitase acted as producer , Kazushige Nojima returned to write the script , and composer Nobuo Uematsu is also involved .
The decision to release Remake in multiple parts was taken so the team did not have to cut any of the original content .
They also decided to add new content and adjust the original character designs to balance between realism and stylization .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
Final Fantasy VII Remake , which retells the story of the original game , follows Cloud Strife , a former Shinra soldier who joins the AVALANCHE eco - terrorist group as a mercenary to fight against the Shinra corporation , who have been draining the planet 's life energy , only to become involved in something much bigger .
Unlike ports of the original game released for computers and other high - definition platforms , the game is a full remake built from the ground - up , featuring full polygonal graphics as opposed to the pre - rendered environments of the original .
Footage shown at PlayStation Experience 2015 demonstrated both exploration and battle mechanics , which both take place in real - time like Final Fantasy XV .
Unlike the ' Active Time Battle ' system of the original , the remake appears to use a real - time battle system similar to the Kingdom Hearts series , which allows players to freely control Cloud or one of his allies as they use their respective weapons to attack enemies .
Players will also be able to use magic and summons , and a Limit Break gauge allows characters to perform more powerful attacks once charged .
Producer Yoshinori Kitase stated that while the game has more real - time elements , there would still be strategic elements , such as selecting weapons and magic for each character to wield .
PRODUCTION HISTORY Section::::Production .
Section::::History .
Final Fantasy VII was developed by Square ( later Square Enix ) for the PlayStation home console .
Beginning its development in 1994 as a Nintendo project before transferring onto the PlayStation , its main staff included producer and series creator Hironobu Sakaguchi , director and co - writer Yoshinori Kitase , artist Yusuke Naora , character designer Tetsuya Nomura , and scenario writer Kazushige Nojima .
Released in 1997 , the game received both contemporary and lasting critical acclaim , became the best - selling title in the Final Fantasy franchise with over 11 million units sold worldwide , and established the Final Fantasy series as a major franchise .
VII was later expanded upon through the multimedia project Compilation of Final Fantasy VII , headed by Kitase and Nomura .
Demands for and rumors of a remake grew in the wake of both a PlayStation 3 tech demo that was shown at the 2005 Electronic Entertainment Expo , showcasing the opening of VII with the company 's new Crystal Tools engine , and the game 's impending tenth anniversary in 2007 .
On both occasions , it was stated by Square Enix staff that no remake was in development .
Despite continued demands and rumors spread by staff messages within the Compilation titles , various reasons were given for why a remake was not being developed : these reasons included wanting a contemporary title to best the sales and popularity of VII ; the wish to focus on new titles ; the necessity of deleting parts of the original game to make the project manageable ; the difficulty of developing on hardware such as the PlayStation 3 ; and the required development time being overly long .
A remake was initially attempted in the early 2000s , when the company announced a remake for PlayStation 2 alongside Final Fantasy VIII and IX , but nothing further was heard of these projects .
The main reason attempts had failed was because remaking VII on current hardware would be a " massive " undertaking , and if kept within a single installment would require heavy cutting of content .
Another reason cited was that the staff were preoccupied with developing Final Fantasy XIII and its sequels , and Remake would have been an equally large or larger project hard to undertake at the same time .
Once the XIII series ended , the team were free to pursue other projects .
The Remake project finally began when Final Fantasy producer Shinji Hashimoto broached the subject to Kitase , Nojima and Nomura .
All three were reaching a stage of life that they defined as " that age " : all felt that if they waited much longer , they might not be alive to or would be too old to develop a remake of VII , and passing the project on to a new generation did not feel right .
Another reason for developing the title was that Square Enix was creating a growing library of PlayStation 4 titles , and the team hoped to increase the console 's popularity .
A notable absence from the originally announced team was Nobuo Uematsu , who composed the original music for VII .
Kitase later revealed that Uematsu was working on the game 's music in an undisclosed role .
It was the first time Uematsu and Kitase had worked together since the release of Final Fantasy X , and Kitase initially thought Uematsu would refuse as he had long since left Square Enix and found success as an independent composer .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
The game reached the full development stage by late 2015 .
Production of Final Fantasy VII Remake is being handled by Business Division 1 , an internal production team at Square Enix .
While Nomura was involved with the project from the start , he only discovered he was the director after seeing himself credited in an internal company presentation video , as he had expected Kitase to fill the role .
He revealed that Kitase himself thought Nomura expected to become director .
Nomura worked as director for both Final Fantasy VII Remake and Kingdom Hearts III .
Despite there already being a story in place , which greatly simplified production on some fronts , Nojima was brought back in to create new story material .
Another project leader was Naoki Hamaguchi , who had previously served as programmer for and project lead for Mobius Final Fantasy .
While the team had the option of simply creating a remastered version of VII with better graphics as many fans had requested , they noted that its graphics and many of its mechanics had become dated by modern standards .
With this in mind , they decided to do a full remake , rebuilding the game systems to suit modern tastes and using current gaming technology to recreate the world of VII .
This decision triggered the creation of Remakes action - based battle system , in addition to the most representative modern title for the Final Fantasy series being the 2009 fighting game Dissidia Final Fantasy .
With this in mind , the battle system will draw from that action - based style while not going over to an entirely action - based system .
The battle system is being handled by Nomura and Mitsunori Takahashi , the latter of whom had worked on both the Kingdom Hearts series and Dissidia 012 Final Fantasy .
One of the game designers was Kyohei Suzuki , a veteran of the company 's Business Division 4 who had previously worked as a planner for Kingdom Hearts 358/2 Days and Kingdom Hearts Coded .
The team 's aim was to retain all the original gameplay mechanics that were well liked by players .
While developing the scenario , the team needed to work carefully so the game did not come over as too nostalgic .
They also needed to take decisions about what could be carried over from the original and what needed adjustment due to changes in social norms since the original 's release , in particular a scene where Cloud cross - dressed as a woman as part of an infiltration mission .
The team were also planning to include references to events detailed in the Compilation titles , though what form these references will take and their scope is still under consideration .
Nomura later clarified that , as of early 2017 , Remake did not share a direct continuity with the Compilation .
The scenario for the first installment was completed in December 2015 .
The game will be fully voiced , and the plan is for the voice actors from the CGI movie to reprise their roles , although not all of them have been asked yet and characters who were limited to cameo appearances such as Red XIII may be recast .
The subtitle " Remake " was included to differentiate the game from its 1997 original .
It was originally going to be story - related , but the team did not want to give the impression that it was a sequel or spin - off .
Rather than using the character models and graphical style of Advent Children , which by that point had been developed using ten - year - old technology , the team decided to create new designs and models for characters : Nomura wished to balance the realism of Advent Children with deformed stylization .
Nomura is in charge of the revamped main character designs , while designer Roberto Ferrari is in charge of designs for secondary characters .
Character modelling is being supervised by Visual Works , Square Enix 's CGI development branch .
Rather than developing their own engine , Square Enix licensed Epic Games ' Unreal Engine 4 to develop the game , with Square Enix and Epic Games Japan working together to optimize the engine for Remake .
The team also received technical assistance from the developers of Kingdom Hearts III , as the latter game is being developed using the same engine .
The game 's lighting is augmented with " Enlighten " , a lighting engine licensed from software company Geomerics .
To help with the action gameplay and video quality , Square Enix originally partnered with video game developer CyberConnect2 : while their expertise was appreciated , the two companies needed to keep in close contact due to very different development styles .
In 2017 , the game 's development focus shifted from being developed with external partners to being a primarily internal project .
One of the biggest changes was the fact that the game was planned as a multi - game release :
according to Kitase , this was because trying to fit the game onto a single release would entail cutting large parts of the game , which went against the team 's vision .
By splitting the game into multiple parts , the team were able to give players access to areas in the game , such as within the city of Midgar , inaccessible in the original .
Each game is planned to be on a similar scale to Final Fantasy XIII .
PRE - RELEASE Section::::Pre - release .
Rumors about Square Enix
beginning development on a remake appeared in 2014 , apparently coming from an industry insider source .
Remake was officially announced at the 2015 Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) during the PlayStation conference : the announcement received a standing ovation from the audience .
The announcement trailer was created by Visual Works .
Square Enix 's stock prices rose in the wake of the announcement to their highest rating since November 2008 , and the YouTube release of the reveal trailer garnered over 10 million views within the following two weeks .
It was next showcased at the 2015 PlayStation Experience , which showcased cutscenes and gameplay from the opening sequence of VII .
During the Final Fantasy 30th anniversary opening ceremony event hosted by Square Enix in Tokyo on 31 January 2017—the 20th anniversary of Final Fantasy VII — the game 's first CGI key visual was unveiled , along with announcements for a collaboration event with Mobius Final Fantasy .
On 18 February , Nomura revealed and discussed two new screenshots of the game , showing off the game 's updated HUD .
While he wanted to show video footage , Square Enix denied his request .
Due to its lack of footage since 2015 , switch to internal development and other projects
Nomura was involved in , there were concerns about the status of the project .
Speaking following E3 2018 , Nomura stated that the game was in active development , with his full attention being shifted to it when Kingdom Hearts III was completed .
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS