IRELAND 'S GOT TALENT
Ireland 's Got Talent is the Irish version of the international Got Talent franchise .
The series launched on 3 February 2018 on Virgin Media One ( formerly known as " TV3 " ) and is hosted by Lucy Kennedy , accompanied by a sister show entitled Ireland 's Got Mór Talent presented by Glenda Gilson and James Kavanagh .
Cork dance troupe RDC won the competition on 24 March 2018 .
Contestants of any age , who possess some sort of talent , can audition for the show , with their performance judged by a panel of judges ; the current lineup consists of Louis Walsh , Michelle Visage , Denise van Outen and Jason Byrne .
Those that make it through the auditions compete against other acts in a series of live semi - finals , with the winning two acts of each semi - final proceeding into the show 's live final .
The prize for winning the contest is a € 50,000 cash prize as well as their own primetime Christmas television special on Virgin Media One .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In May 2015 , it was announced that current The X Factor judge , Louis Walsh , would be launching a new Irish talent show , produced by Simon Cowell as a judge .
The show was expected to be premiered in 2017 or 2018 .
Walsh later stated that he would like to broadcast an Irish edition of Got Talent , though he stated that the untitled talent show was only in early development .
RTÉ One and TV3 showed interest in ordering the programme , however TV3 originally turned down the show in 2016 .
Simon Cowell announced that he will be a special guest judge on the programme during the series ' launch .
In February 2016 , RTÉ One denied that The Voice of Ireland would be cancelled in order to broadcast the new talent show .
However , the show was later replaced by Dancing with the Stars .
In August 2017 , it was reported that Lucy Kennedy would host the show , with Walsh later confirming himself and Michelle Visage on ITV 's This Morning as two of the judges on the show which will launch in January 2018 .
The series was announced during a press conference at the National Concert Hall in Dublin on 30 August 2017 , with Denise van Outen and comedian Jason Byrne confirmed as the other two judges .
Glenda Gilson and James Kavanagh present the sister show , Ireland 's Got Mór Talent .
FORMAT AUDITIONS Section::::Format .
Section::::Auditions .
The show holds two rounds of auditions for contestants .
The first round , referred to as the " open auditions " , are held across several different cities around Ireland during the Autumn months .
The second round , referred to as the " Judges ' Auditions " , are held , prior to the broadcast of the show later that year during spring or early summer - these auditions consists of the contestants who made it through the first round , and are held within a select set of cities .
For the Judges ' Auditions , each site used for these is located within a theatre or convention hall .
These sites are primarily chosen for the purpose of having facilities that can handle large volumes of contestants , with each set up into three arrangements when auditions are taking place : a waiting area for contestants to prepare and await their turn to perform , with monitors to allow them to see the performances of other contestants ; the wings , where a contestant enters and leaves from , and where friends and family of the contestant can view them from ; and the main stage , where the contestant performs their act before the judging panel , who are located in front of the stage .
The main stage area is usually modified to include the judges ' panel desk , along with a special lighting rig above the stage , consisting of Xs that each have the name of a judge under them .
Each contestant that auditions is given a number by the production team and remains in the waiting area until called out into the wings , giving them a certain amount of time to prepare their act .
Upon being allowed onto the main stage , they will usually be asked by one of the judges for their name and what they plan to perform , along with other details such as age , occupation , personal background , and what they wish to achieve if they won .
After this , they are then given three minutes to conduct their performance before both the judges and a live audience , with some acts being supported by a backing track provided by the production team .
If at any time , the judges find the performance to be unconvincing , boring or completely wrong , they may use the buzzer before them , which changes the Xs from white to red ; if all the judges press their buzzers , then the performance is immediately over .
However , a judge can retract their buzzer 's use if they felt they had done so prematurely before witnessing a contest 's performance to the end ; this is true if the performance appears to look bad , but later turns out to have been good in their eyes .
Once a performance is over , each judge will give an overview of what they thought about the act , before casting a vote .
If the contestant(s ) receives a majority vote of " Yes " , they then proceed onto the next stage in the contest , otherwise they are eliminated from that series ' contest .
All 4 judges and host have a Golden Buzzer , this means the act that impressed them most gets the golden buzzer sending the act(s ) straight through to the live semi final .
SEMI - FINALS Section::::Semi - finals .
Contestants that make it into the semi - finals by making it through the auditions and being chosen by the judges perform once more before an audience and the judges , with their performance broadcast on live television .
Like the Audition stage of the contest , each semi - finalist must attempt to impress by primarily conducting a new routine of their act within the same span of time ; the judges can still use a buzzer if they are displeased with a performance and can end it early if all the buzzers are used , along with giving a personal opinion about an act when the performance is over .
Of the semi - finalists that take part , only two can progress into the final , which is determined by two different types of votes - a public phone vote , and a judges ' vote .
The phone vote , which occurs after all the semi - finalists have performed , determines the first winner of the semi - final and takes place via a special phone line over a short break from the programme .
During this time , the public votes for the act they liked best , through a phone number in which the final two digits are different for each semi - finalist - these digits are primarily arranged by the order of their appearance .
Once the lines have closed and the votes have been counted , the programme airs a live results episode , in which the semi - finalist with the highest number of votes automatically moves into the final .
The second winner is determined by the judges ' vote , which held after the results of the phone vote have been given out , and determines whether the second or third most popular semi - finalist in the public vote moves on to the final .
The judges ' vote , held after the result of the phone vote , determines the second act that wins this stage , and is conducted between the second and third most popular acts the public voted on .
After the number of judges was increased to four , the rule on the judges ' vote was modified -
if the vote is tied , the semi - finalist with the second highest tally of public votes automatically moves on to the final .
FINAL Section::::Final .
For the final of each series , the format of the contest operates in exactly the same manner as the semi - finals , including being broadcast live on television , though this time the winner is determined purely by a phone vote , with the finalists attempting to secure more votes than the others by performing a new routine at their best .
Upon the result being given , the top two acts are brought onto the stage , with the hosts announcing which of them received the most votes .
The winner of each year 's contest will receive a € 50,000 cash prize as well as their own primetime Christmas television special .
JUDGES
Section::::Judges .
For the first series , the judging panel consisted of former The X Factor judge , Louis Walsh , Michelle Visage , Denise van Outen and comedian Jason Byrne .
SERIES OVERVIEW
Section::::Series overview . !
width="05 % " Series !
width="10 % " Premiere !
width="10 % "
Finale !
width="10 % " Winner 's prize !
width="15 % " Winner !
width="15 % " Runner - up(s ) !
width="10 % "
Presenter !
width="10 % " Judges ! scope="row
" 1 ! scope="row " 2 Notes SERIES 1 ( 2018 )
Section::::Series 1 ( 2018 ) .
In May 2015 , Louis Walsh expressed his interest in launching the Irish version of the Got Talent franchise .
The series was announced during a press conference at the National Concert Hall in Dublin on 30 August 2017 , with Louis Walsh , Michelle Visage , Jason Byrne , and Denise van Outen confirmed as the judges .
The judges auditions were taped at the TLT Concert Hall & Theatre , Drogheda .
The semi - finals and final were held at The Helix , Dublin which started on 19 March 2018 , continuing at 21 March until the 24th for the final .
The judges auditions were taped in November 2017 at the TLT Concert Hall & Theatre , Drogheda .
The first series started airing on 3 February 2018 .
Dance troupe RDC was hailed as the winner , with FKFT and Xquisite , both dance acts , as runners - up .
SERIES 2 ( 2019 )
Section::::Series 2 ( 2019 ) .
On 27 June 2018 , the producers ' auditions for second series was announced on the show 's website .
All four judges and presenter were reported to return for the second series .
INTERNATIONAL BROADCAST Section::::International broadcast .
After the first series aired , the show began airing in the United Kingdom on 5Star .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS