JURASSIC WORLD :
FALLEN KINGDOM Jurassic World
: Fallen Kingdom is a 2018 American science fiction adventure film and the sequel to Jurassic World ( 2015 ) .
Directed by J. A. Bayona , it is the fifth installment of the Jurassic Park film series , as well as the second installment of a planned Jurassic World trilogy .
Derek Connolly and Jurassic World director Colin Trevorrow both returned as writers , with Trevorrow and the original Jurassic Park director Steven Spielberg as executive producers .
Set on the fictional Central American island of Isla Nublar , off the Pacific coast of Costa Rica , it follows Owen Grady and Claire Dearing as they rescue the remaining dinosaurs before a volcanic eruption destroys it .
Chris Pratt , Bryce Dallas Howard , B. D. Wong , and Jeff Goldblum reprise their roles from previous films in the series , with Rafe Spall , Justice Smith , Daniella Pineda , James Cromwell , Toby Jones , Ted Levine , Isabella Sermon , and Geraldine Chaplin joining the cast .
Filming took place from February to July 2017 in the United Kingdom and Hawaii .
Produced and distributed by Universal Pictures , Fallen Kingdom premiered in Madrid on May 21 , 2018 , and was released internationally in early June 2018 and in the United States on June 22 , 2018 .
The film grossed over $ 1.3 billion worldwide , making it the third Jurassic film to pass the billion dollar mark .
It is the third highest - grossing film of 2018 and the 12th highest - grossing film of all time .
It received mixed reviews from critics , who praised Pratt 's and Howard 's performance , Bayona 's direction , the visuals , Michael Giacchino 's score and the " surprisingly dark moments " , while others suggested the series had run its course , criticizing the screenplay and lack of innovation .
An untitled sequel is set to be released on June 11 , 2021 , with Trevorrow returning to direct .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
A small team of mercenaries arrives on the abandoned Isla Nublar to collect DNA from the remains of the Indominus rex at the bottom of the park 's lagoon .
After successfully collecting a bone fragment , the team 's survivors barely escape the island following attacks by the Mosasaurus and Tyrannosaurus rex .
A U.S. Senate hearing in Washington , D.C. debates whether Isla Nublar 's dinosaurs should be saved from an impending volcanic eruption .
Mathematician Dr. Ian Malcolm testifies that the dinosaurs should be allowed to perish to correct John Hammond 's mistake of cloning them .
Meanwhile , Jurassic World 's former operations manager , Claire Dearing , has established the Dinosaur Protection Group to save the animals .
After the Senate rules against rescuing the dinosaurs , Hammond 's former partner , Benjamin Lockwood , summons Claire to his Northern California estate .
Lockwood and his aide , Eli Mills , reveal a plan to relocate the dinosaurs to a new island sanctuary .
Claire is needed to help reactivate the park 's dinosaur tracking system to locate the animals , particularly Blue , the last surviving Velociraptor .
Although they are estranged , Claire recruits Jurassic World 's former Velociraptor trainer and Blue 's alpha , Owen Grady , to help capture her .
On Isla Nublar , Claire and former park technician Franklin Webb reactivate the online tracking system .
Owen , paleo - veterinarian Zia Rodriguez , and a mercenary team led by Ken Wheatley search for and find Blue .
The encounter escalates , resulting in a mercenary soldier shooting Blue , and Wheatley tranquilizing Owen .
The mercenaries take Zia with them to treat Blue 's injury .
The mercenary ship , loaded with the captured dinosaurs , departs for the U.S. mainland as the dinosaurs left behind die in the eruption .
Claire , Franklin , and Owen sneak aboard in time and assist Zia in transfusing Blue with Tyrannosaurus blood .
The group now realize that the captured dinosaurs were never being transported to a new island and are for another purpose .
At the estate , Lockwood 's orphaned pre - teen granddaughter Maisie overhears Mills and auctioneer Gunnar Eversol secretly planning to auction the captured dinosaurs on the black market .
They will also unveil the Indoraptor , a new genetically - modified dinosaur created by geneticist Dr. Henry Wu using Indominus rex and Velociraptor DNA .
Wu wants Blue 's DNA to create an enhanced Indoraptor , unaware that Blue 's blood is contaminated .
After Maisie informs Lockwood about the auction , he confronts Mills , who murders him .
Maisie is later revealed to have been cloned from Lockwood 's deceased daughter and is the reason John Hammond , who opposed human cloning , ended their association .
The dinosaurs are transported to Lockwood 's estate and caged .
Zia and Franklin narrowly evade capture , but Owen and Claire are apprehended and confined .
Owen incites a Stygimoloch into breaking open their cell .
They find Maisie , who leads them to the auction where the Indoraptor is being sold despite Wu 's protests that it is a prototype .
Owen disrupts the proceedings by luring the Stygimoloch into the room .
In the ensuing chaos , Wheatley tranquilizes the Indoraptor to extract a tooth as a trophy , but it feigns sedation and kills Wheatley , Eversol , and others as it escapes .
The Indoraptor hunts Owen , Claire , and Maisie throughout the mansion .
Zia releases Blue , who attacks the Indoraptor , causing it to fall through a glass roof to its death .
When a hydrogen cyanide gas leak threatens the caged dinosaurs , Maisie frees them , despite Owen 's objections .
Mills attempts to flee with the Indominus rex bone but is devoured by a Carnotaurus and the Tyrannosaurus , which tramples the bone .
Owen , Claire , Maisie , Zia , and Franklin safely escape , while Blue and the other released dinosaurs flee the estate grounds .
In a new U.S. Senate hearing , Dr. Malcolm declares the beginning of a Neo - Jurassic Age , where humans and dinosaurs must learn to coexist .
The closing scenes show the freed dinosaurs roaming wilderness and outer urban areas .
CAST
* Chris Pratt as Owen Grady : A Navy veteran and ethologist , and former Velociraptor handler for Jurassic World .
* Bryce Dallas Howard as Claire Dearing : Jurassic World 's former operations manager , now a dinosaur - rights activist , who has founded the Dinosaur Protection Group to save Isla Nublar 's surviving dinosaurs .
* Rafe Spall as Eli Mills :
* Justice Smith as Franklin Webb :
A former IT technician for Jurassic World who is now the Dinosaur Protection Group 's systems analyst and hacker .
* Daniella Pineda as Zia Rodriguez :
A former Marine who is now the Dinosaur Protection Group 's paleoveterinarian .
* James Cromwell as Sir Benjamin Lockwood :
John Hammond 's former partner in developing the technology to clone dinosaurs .
* Toby Jones as Gunnar Eversol :
* Ted Levine as Ken Wheatley : A seasoned mercenary who commands the rescue operation on Isla Nublar .
* B. D. Wong as Henry Wu :
* Isabella Sermon as Maisie Lockwood : Lockwood 's pre - teen granddaughter and legal ward following her parents ' deaths .
* Geraldine Chaplin as Iris :
The Lockwood Estate housekeeper , Maisie 's nanny , and protector of the Lockwood family secrets .
* Jeff Goldblum as Ian Malcolm : PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production . Section::::Development .
During early conversations about the 2015 film Jurassic World , executive producer Steven Spielberg told director Colin Trevorrow that he was interested in having several more films made .
In April 2014 , Trevorrow announced that sequels had been discussed : " We wanted to create something that would be a little bit less arbitrary and episodic , and something that could potentially arc into a series that would feel like a complete story . "
Trevorrow said Chris Pratt and Omar Sy might reprise their roles for the next few films and that he would direct the film if asked .
Trevorrow later told Spielberg he would only focus on directing one film in the series , and announced in May 2015 that he would be involved in the sequel " in some way , but not as director . "
He felt different directors could bring different qualities to future films .
Pratt had been signed for future films in the series , as was Ty Simpkins , who portrayed Gray in Jurassic World .
On June 3 , 2015 , Trevorrow said that Jurassic World left many story possibilities open : " I really like the idea that this group of geneticists are n't the only people who can make a dinosaur [ … ] when you think of the differences between Apple and PC — the minute something goes open - source , there are all kinds of entities and interests that may be able to utilize that technology . "
On June 8 , 2015 , Jurassic World producer Frank Marshall met with Trevorrow and Universal Pictures to discuss a sequel .
Later that month , he did not deny the film could involve " dinosaur soldiers " and said the series is " not always gon na be about a Jurassic Park " .
He felt future films could explore the idea of dinosaurs and humans co - existing .
Trevorrow also hinted the next film might not involve the Jurassic World theme park , and said he would be interested in seeing a Jurassic Park film made by one of several unnamed Spanish horror film directors .
PRE - PRODUCTION Section::::Pre - production .
On July 23 , 2015 , Universal announced a fifth film had been scheduled for a June 22 , 2018 , release date in the U.S.
It was also announced that Trevorrow would write the script with his writing partner Derek Connolly , as they had for Jurassic World ; that the film would be produced by Frank Marshall ; and that Spielberg and Trevorrow would act as executive producers .
Universal also said that Chris Pratt and Bryce Dallas Howard would reprise their roles from the previous film .
At the time of the film 's announcement , Trevorrow said the series " is n't always going to be limited to theme parks " .
He confirmed the film would not involve " a bunch of dinosaurs chasing people on an island " stating , " That 'll get old real fast . "
Trevorrow also spoke of the film 's possible open - source storyline : " It 's almost like InGen is Mac , but what if PC gets their hands on it ?
What if there are 15 different entities around the world who can make a dinosaur ? "
In August 2015 , Howard said the script was being written , and Universal Studios announced that the film would be released in the UK two weeks early , on June 7 , 2018 .
Later that year , B. D. Wong said he " would be happy to return " as Dr. Henry Wu , while Howard announced that filming would begin in 2017 .
Howard also said she would be interested in seeing characters from earlier Jurassic Park films return for the fifth film , saying , " I could see versions of the film where a lot of the characters come back . "
By October 2015 , director J. A. Bayona was being considered to direct the film .
He chose instead to direct the World War Z sequel , a project for which he had already signed on .
In January 2016 , it was reported that Bayona could still be a candidate to direct the film after he dropped out of the World War Z sequel due to other commitments .
In March 2016 , London was being scouted as a possible filming location and setting for the film ; it was subsequently announced that filming would take place at a UK studio .
On April 14 , 2016 , actor Jeff Goldblum said he had no plans to appear in the film as his character Ian Malcolm , although he said he was open to the possibility .
On April 18 , 2016 , Bayona was announced as the film 's director , with Belén Atienza and Patrick Crowley joining Marshall as producers .
Spielberg , Marshall , and Kathleen Kennedy had been impressed by his 2012 film , The Impossible , and initially considered having him direct Jurassic World .
He declined as he felt there was not enough time for production .
Trevorrow wanted Bayona to direct the film after seeing his 2007 horror film , The Orphanage .
Before he was hired , Bayona had met with Trevorrow and became enthused with the project after being shown the script 's second half , which would play out like a haunted house film .
After Bayona was hired , Trevorrow said of the film , " We 're moving it into new territory .
J. A. Bayona is an incredible director and I know he 'll push the boundaries of what a ' Jurassic ' movie is .
I think it 's important that we take risks .
A franchise must evolve or perish . "
Trevorrow and Bayona worked closely throughout the film 's production .
In June 2016 , actor Sam Neill was asked if he would return to the series as Dr. Alan Grant and responded , " You never say never , but I think it 's moved on .
It 's different times . "
The film , under the working title of Ancient Futures , was in full pre - production as of July 2016 , with storyboards being designed .
Andy Nicholson was hired as the film 's production designer .
He spent four weeks with Bayona in Barcelona , discussing reference pictures and background details , as well as Bayona 's ideas for the Lockwood mansion .
Production was scheduled to begin in Hawaii in February 2017 .
Wales was also confirmed as a filming location , including Brecon Beacons and Penbryn .
Trevorrow said that Hawaii would be used as a primary filming location , while U.K. shooting would be limited to studios , without the story taking place there .
Trevorrow also said the film would feature many dinosaurs that were not seen in previous films and denied that the film 's story would involve militarized dinosaurs , which would only be mentioned in the film .
For the film 's second half where dinosaurs are transported by boat to the mainland , Ecuador and Peru had both been scouted as possible filming locations and settings .
Marshall thought that Cabo San Lucas would be ideal , but these locations ultimately did not work for the film 's story .
Although the film was shot partly in England , Spielberg felt the country was too far from the fictional Isla Nublar to be used as the in - film setting for the second half .
He and the producers did not want the film to spend too much time on a boat .
Crowley stated , " Rather than making it a movie about traveling on a boat , which is not very exciting , you needed to get to the place . "
In September 2016 , Bayona confirmed the film would be the second chapter in a planned Jurassic World trilogy .
Later that year , Marshall said that Wong was " probably going to come back " .
Jurassic World composer Michael Giacchino confirmed that he would return as composer for the fifth film .
Óscar Faura was announced as the film 's cinematographer at the end of the year .
WRITING Section::::Writing .
Although Spielberg was heavily involved in the development of ideas for Jurassic World , he had Trevorrow and Connolly devise their own ideas for the sequel .
He retained final approval on the project .
In June 2015 , about two weeks after the theatrical release of Jurassic World , Trevorrow embarked on a road trip from Los Angeles to his home state of Vermont .
Connolly agreed to accompany Trevorrow so they could discuss a basic set of ideas Trevorrow had for the film .
During their eight - day trip , they began work on the script and devised the basic story .
Trevorrow said the film 's story was inspired by a quote from Dr. Alan Grant in the first film : " Dinosaurs and man , two species separated by 65 million years of evolution , have suddenly been thrown back into the mix together .
How can we possibly have the slightest idea of what to expect ? "
Trevorrow said that the story was heavily influenced by the idea that , " A mistake made a long time ago just ca n't be undone . "
The film is also based on concepts from Michael Crichton 's novel Jurassic Park ( 1990 ) and its sequel The Lost World ( 1995 ) , and includes dialogue from the first novel .
Isla Nublar 's volcano was in the first novel , and the writers chose to incorporate it into the film 's plot .
Trevorrow compared the destruction of Isla Nublar to " the burning down of a church or a temple , " saying , " I honestly think it 's like killing off a character in a way , and if you 're going to do that , as long as you approach it with the proper respect and acknowledgement that you understand how indelible and permanent what you 're doing is , then hopefully people will have an emotional response but they wo n't hate you for it .
" The idea to include a " silent partner " for John Hammond was also inspired by the Jurassic Park novel .
Although the character of Benjamin Lockwood was not featured in the novel , the book depicts the early years leading up to the cloning of dinosaurs .
This made Trevorrow realize there would have been many people involved in such a project , convincing him that someone like Lockwood would be among those people .
In his initial film treatment , Trevorrow had included story elements that Marshall and Crowley considered excessive for a single film .
The producers felt it was important to include details about Owen and Claire 's lives after the events of Jurassic World .
Although the original ending was the same as the final film , Trevorrow had wanted to include more details about the integration of dinosaurs into the world .
He chose to remove them to keep the story focused .
The script 's structure , Trevorrow said , was inspired by Spielberg 's 2015 film Bridge of Spies , in which two seemingly unrelated stories " collide in the middle , and move on together .
"
Trevorrow was also inspired by the 1975 film Three Days of the Condor , saying , " It 's one of those places where you think you know what the score is , and then everything changes , and then suddenly you do n't know who to trust . "
Having directed Jurassic World , Trevorrow was familiar with how animatronics worked and wrote scenes for the sequel that would allow for their use .
For example , animatronics are incapable of certain actions such as running .
Regarding the idea of human cloning , Trevorrow said that " we 're so much closer to cloning humans than we are to cloning dinosaurs .
It felt like far less of a leap to me than dinosaurs do .
[ ... ] To have a character who has such deep love and has felt such loss and the inability to go on , I think is something we all feel .
So the idea that you might be able to bring someone back in that way is emotionally grounded in a very universal idea . "
Trevorrow also said he was interested in " the larger impact " of genetic power , including its emotional impact and its potential human impact .
He added , " we knew that we did n't want to continue to make movies about the dangers of messing with science .
We want to tell a story about where we are now , which is that we have messed with science , we have fundamentally altered our world and now we 're dealing with the consequences . "
Trevorrow was nervous about how audiences would react to the story 's human cloning aspect , an idea supported by Spielberg , who was excited about the questions that such an idea could raise in the film 's sequel .
Because of criticism of the death of Zara in the previous film , Trevorrow said for Jurassic World :
Fallen Kingdom , " We made sure that every death was earned .
Everybody deserves their death in this movie , a lesson learned .
In 2018 everyone earns it .
Horrible people . "
After Bayona was hired , he began reading Crichton 's novels — including Jurassic Park and The Lost World — for inspiration and " to try to immerse myself in Crichton 's mind . "
Trevorrow and Connolly began working with Bayona in July 2016 , to perfect the script to the director 's liking .
Trevorrow said the film would be more " suspenseful and scary " than its predecessor : " It 's just the way it 's designed ; it 's the way the story plays out .
I knew I wanted Bayona to direct it long before anyone ever heard that it was a possibility , so the whole thing was just built around his skillset .
" Trevorrow later described the film as " The Impossible meets The Orphanage with dinosaurs .
"
Bayona said that with the first half of the film set on an island , " you have what you expect from a Jurassic movie , " while the second half " moves to a totally different environment that feels more suspenseful , darker , claustrophobic , and even has this kind of gothic element , which I love . "
The " gothic element " of suspense was influenced by Alfred Hitchcock films .
He compared it to The Empire Strikes Back and , which were both considered darker than their predecessors .
Trevorrow said the film 's dinosaurs would be " a parable of the treatment animals receive today : the abuse , medical experimentation , pets , having wild animals in zoos like prisons , the use the military has made of them , animals as weapons .
" The idea of weaponized dinosaurs came from Spielberg .
Trevorrow said that with the film 's dinosaur auction , " The worst instincts of mankind are revealed .
The first film was very clearly about corporate greed .
This is just about human greed . "
The film includes ideas previously featured in a rejected 2004 draft for Jurassic Park IV ( later Jurassic World ) , presented in the same structure : a return to Isla Nublar followed by a second half set in a large Gothic building on the mainland .
The idea of a dinosaur auction was also in the rejected draft , which Trevorrow had read while writing the first Jurassic World film .
Bayona had his own ideas incorporated into the script while essentially retaining the original story devised by Trevorrow and Connolly .
The film 's underwater opening sequence was already in their script .
Bayona asked Trevorrow to push for it to become a bigger scene with a larger set .
One of Trevorrow 's ideas was to include Jeff Goldblum 's character of Ian Malcolm , who appeared in the franchise 's earlier films .
Trevorrow and Goldblum discussed dialogue ideas for Malcolm , and Trevorrow said he used a lot of dialogue from Crichton 's Jurassic Park novel for the character .
Marshall said that Trevorrow wrote Malcolm as " the ' Uh oh , danger , I told you so ' kind of character " .
Trevorrow said of Malcolm , " I saw him as kind of Al Gore .
He 's got a beard now , and he 's like , '
I told all of you this was going to be a disaster , and sure enough it is . ' "
Bayona and Trevorrow ultimately removed certain moments from the script they felt would be better for the sequel , which was expected to depict dinosaurs having spread around the world .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
In October 2016 , casting was underway for the role of a nine - year - old girl .
Approximately 2,500 girls were interviewed for the part , which ultimately went to Isabella Sermon , marking her film debut .
By November 2016 , Tom Holland — who previously starred in The Impossible — had discussed a role in the film with Bayona , but did not believe he would be available because of scheduling conflicts .
Toby Jones , Rafe Spall , and Justice Smith were cast at the end of the year .
Daniella Pineda , Ted Levine and James Cromwell were cast in early 2017 , while Wong confirmed his return as Dr. Henry Wu .
To maintain secrecy , the Ancient Futures title was used in the casting phase .
During auditions , references to dinosaurs were replaced with animals such as lions and grizzly bears .
To convince the studio that Pineda was right for the role of Zia , Bayona had her demonstrate she could perform comedy and drama scenes , as well as improvise .
Pineda auditioned seven times before being given the role .
She auditioned for Bayona , Atienza , and Crowley but did not meet the cast until she arrived in England for filming .
In March 2017 , Bayona announced that Geraldine Chaplin , who had appeared in each of his previous films , had joined the cast .
The next month , it was announced that Jeff Goldblum would be reprising his role from the first two films as Dr. Ian Malcolm .
Bayona considered Malcolm a " great character ! "
Marshall said , " The world has changed a lot since Ian Malcolm went to Jurassic Park and we need his point of view now more than ever .
He told us about chaos theory , he was right . "
FILMING Section::::Filming .
Filming began at Langley Business Centre in Slough , England , on February 23 , 2017 .
Scenes shot at the business center included Claire 's Dinosaur Protection Group office , Owen training his baby raptors , and Owen and Claire attempting to retrieve blood from the sedated T. rex .
Most of the filming in England took place at Pinewood Studios .
Because of its large sound stages , it was considered perfect for the film 's many interior scenes .
After filming concluded in England , production moved to Hawaii , which was used as a primary filming location .
Scenes shot in Hawaii were set on Isla Nublar , the fictional island featured in the first and fourth films .
Scenes were also expected to be shot at Brecon Beacons National Park in Wales .
The film was shot in CinemaScope , and is the first entry in the Jurassic Park series presented in a 2.40:1 aspect ratio .
The film crew used Arri Alexa 65 exclusively .
Several scenes were shot to reference various films including From Here to Eternity ( 1953 ) and Dracula ( 1979 ) , as well as Spielberg 's films Raiders of the Lost Ark ( 1981 ) and E.T. the Extra - Terrestrial ( 1982 ) .
Spielberg was shown scenes from the film during production and offered Bayona his opinions .
During filming , and in between takes , Bayona used an iPod to play different types of music on set to inspire the actors , as he had done with his previous films .
He also played sound effects from other films in the series , including a T. rex roar that he sometimes used to get a natural reaction from the actors .
In particular , Bayona played unexpected sounds and loud music to scare Smith for certain scenes , as his character is portrayed as easily frightened .
Bayona and Pratt discussed each scene involving Owen 's character before it was shot .
Many of Pratt 's ideas were used in the film .
Discussing Levine 's character , Bayona said , " He came with this idea of creating this kind of military man .
He just wanted to portray the most hateable character possible .
[ … ] And he was so creative on set , trying to give ideas , bringing story notes to make this character more and more hateable .
"
The film includes several indirect references to U.S. President Donald Trump , including an idea from Trevorrow where a news ticker says the " U.S. president " has questioned the " existence of dinosaurs in the first place .
"
Jones was allowed to decide his character 's appearance , which included a wig similar to Trump 's hairstyle .
An unscripted moment left in the film involves Levine 's character referring to Pineda 's character Zia as a " nasty woman " , a comment that was previously made famous by Trump .
In April 2017 , scenes were filmed at East Berkshire College in Berkshire , England , and at Loch Long in Argyll and Bute , Scotland .
Also that month , filming took place at Hartland Park — formerly the Pyestock jet engine test site — in Fleet , Hampshire , England , where the film 's opening sequence was shot .
It was filmed through the night and involved helicopters , rain machines , and lightning simulators to depict a thunderstorm .
Bayona described the opening scene as a " massive action piece " that resembled the prologues used in James Bond films .
Scenes were filmed on sets at Hawley Common , also in Hampshire , where the exterior of Lockwood 's mansion was built , as well as a mainland loading dock where the dinosaurs are brought .
The exterior of the ship that transports Isla Nublar 's dinosaurs to the mainland was created entirely through computer - generated effects by Industrial Light & Magic ( ILM ) , which worked on the previous films .
The ship 's interior was constructed by Nicholson and his team as a large set at Pinewood Studios , and after filming , it was rebuilt to depict the large rooftop of the Lockwood Estate .
The exterior of the Cragside country house in Northumberland , England , along with its coniferous surroundings , was used to depict the Lockwood Estate exterior .
The film crew took plate shots of Cragside and used a computer to combine the shots with footage filmed on set to create the exterior of the Lockwood Estate .
No actors were involved in the Cragside shoot .
Nicholson previsualized each of the sets he and his team built to ensure they would be large enough for the intended scenes .
He noted , " Someone can tell you a Velociraptor is X - feet long , but until you see it in the space , you ca n't appreciate what that means in terms of your set and the action that needs to take place within it . "
The interior of the multi - floor Lockwood Estate was built entirely on sound stages at Pinewood Studios .
The estate set included Eli Mills ' office , Dr. Wu 's large underground laboratory , an underground dinosaur containment facility , separate bedrooms belonging to Benjamin and Maisie Lockwood , and a large library with dinosaur skeletons and artifacts .
When filming was completed in the Lockwood library , the set was redecorated and converted into the estate 's underground garage , where the dinosaur auction takes place .
Pratt said the film involved significantly more stunts than its predecessor .
An improvised fist fight scene , between Owen and several men during the dinosaur auction , was added late in filming .
It was the first such scene to be featured in the film series , and was filmed in a single continuous shot with the use of a dolly track .
On May 10 , 2017 , Rock Barracks military base , near Woodbridge , Suffolk , confirmed that filming was taking place on the base .
On May 24 , 2017 , scenes were shot at Hampshire 's Blackbushe Airport , which stood in as an American airfield .
Filming in the United Kingdom concluded on June 10 , 2017 .
Up to that point , Trevorrow was present as an on - set writer for each day of production so he could aid Bayona with any possible script changes .
Goldblum shot his scenes in a single day at Pinewood Studios , during the last day of filming in the United Kingdom .
Jones also filmed his scenes on large sets at Pinewood Studios .
Filming in Hawaii was underway as of June 13 , 2017 , and lasted more than 25 days , with locations that included Dillingham Airfield and Pua'ena Point .
On June 21 , 2017 , filming began at Heʻeia Kea Small Boat Harbor , which served as Isla Nublar 's shipping dock .
More than half the harbor was closed for filming , which required the use of smoke machines .
Scenes were scheduled to be shot there until the end of the month .
Filming also took place in a nearby Heʻeia jungle for scenes where Owen searches for and locates Blue .
As a reference to the first Jurassic Park film , the scene between Owen and Blue includes an overturned Ford Explorer , previously featured in the original film as a Jurassic Park tour vehicle .
Trevorrow had initially considered including the vehicle in a scene in Jurassic World , before settling on the original Jurassic Park visitor center instead .
On June 22 , 2017 , the film 's official title was announced as Jurassic World :
Fallen Kingdom .
At the time , filming was underway at Kualoa Ranch on the Hawaiian island of Oahu .
Filming at Kualoa Ranch included the exterior set for a radio tower bunker .
In Hawaii , scenes where characters are running were filmed with the use of the Edge Arm , a stabilized camera that was attached to a crane , which was mounted to a truck that drove alongside the actors .
This specialized camera allowed for scenes to be shot steadily despite the truck being driven over rough terrain .
The film includes a scene on Isla Nublar where Claire and Franklin are riding in a ball - shaped Jurassic World Gyrosphere ride to evade dinosaurs .
It was shot at Kualoa Ranch and in England .
Bayona described it as one of the film 's biggest challenges .
In Hawaii , the Edge Arm was used to film the actors riding in the Gyrosphere as it was hauled on a trailer to simulate its movement .
In England , an outdoor roller coaster track with a 40-foot drop was constructed for the Gyrosphere , which Howard and Smith rode in to shoot a scene where the ride plummets off a cliff and into the water surrounding Isla Nublar .
Although this portion of the scene could have been shot with the use of a green screen , Bayona wanted the actors to express genuine fear for the scene .
The last part of the scene was shot at Pinewood Studios , where a large indoor tank was constructed and filled with water to depict the submerged ride as Owen tries to break it open and rescue Claire and Franklin .
This portion of the scene was filmed in five different takes that were merged to make it seem like a single continuous shot .
Pratt was aided by a diving instructor while he shot the scene , which also involved Howard and Smith being underwater .
Filming in the tank lasted five days , and required a crew of 85 .
It was shot primarily by a second unit crew , as Bayona was busy directing scenes on other soundstages .
David Vickery and his team at ILM created the volcanic special effects and consulted volcanologists for research .
According to Vickery , the team asked " how a volcano of this type might erupt " and also requested information about " the various stages of lava and pyroclastic flow .
We are speeding it up a bit for the sake of our film , but it is definitely all based on real science .
" The lava was created through digital effects , although one scene used cat litter set on fire as a stand - in on set , so the actors would know where to react .
The scene was set in an Isla Nublar bunker as lava begins dripping from the roof .
The litter had been soaked in flammable liquid , and was dropped from 12 different nozzles above the set .
The Main Street section of the Jurassic World theme park was rebuilt on Police Beach in Hawaii for a scene where Owen and Claire return to the island .
The set had been built previously in Louisiana for filming of the previous Jurassic World , but was dismantled after filming concluded .
For the sequel , Nicholson had part of the Main Street practically built , although the park 's visitor center could not be constructed in its entirety because of its large size .
Unbuilt portions of the park were created by ILM using digital set extensions .
Main Street was the largest set built in Hawaii , and required more than three months to complete .
Many of the same prop makers returned to recreate the Main Street set , which then had to be aged to give the appearance of abandonment .
On July 7 , 2017 , filming took place at Oahu 's Hālona Blowhole , where Pratt , Howard and Smith shot scenes on a beach .
Filming concluded on July 8 , 2017 , after shooting was completed at Hālona Blowhole .
Bayona said that making the film was the biggest challenge of his life .
The original cut of the film was approximately two hours and 45 minutes , which the filmmakers considered too long .
It was trimmed to two hours and eight minutes for the final cut .
One scene removed from the film for runtime reasons revealed the character of Zia to be a lesbian , an idea that came from Bayona and Trevorrow .
CREATURES ON SCREEN Section::::Creatures on screen .
The film 's dinosaurs were created using a combination of animatronics and computer - generated imagery ( CGI ) .
Special effects artist Neal Scanlan served as the film 's creature effects supervisor , while Vickery and Alex Wuttke were visual effects supervisors .
Scanlan worked on the animatronic dinosaurs , while Vickery and his ILM team created versions of the dinosaurs through CGI .
ILM animators in Vancouver worked on dinosaur stampede scenes , while ILM 's London studio created the remaining creature scenes .
Approximately 52 ILM animators worked on the film .
Scanlan worked closely with Bayona and Vickery to create the creatures .
Vickery and ILM did extensive research to accurately create and depict the dinosaurs , which included consulting with paleontologists .
The ILM team also referred to elephants and rhinos to determine how the dinosaurs should move and behave .
Dinosaur expert John Hankla , of the Denver Museum of Nature and Science , served as an advisor on the film .
After reading fan thoughts on dinosaurs and speaking with children , Bayona realized that dinosaur textures and colors were often brought up and said , " I thought that was the area where I could play with .
They feel somehow a little bit more exotic and richer in this movie .
" New research had also suggested that real dinosaurs were more colorful and brighter than previously thought .
The film features more dinosaurs than any previous film in the series .
Bayona wanted to include several new dinosaurs never seen in earlier films , including Allosaurus , Baryonyx , Carnotaurus , Sinoceratops , Stygimoloch , and the fictional Indoraptor .
Baryonyx and Carnotaurus were among the creatures created through CGI .
Dilophosaurus was in the film 's original cut , but was removed .
The film features more animatronic dinosaurs than any previous sequel , and the animatronics used were more technologically advanced than in the earlier films .
Five animatronic dinosaurs were created for the film , whereas the previous film featured only one .
More animatronics were used because the film features closer interaction between humans and dinosaurs than its predecessor , including a scene where Howard rides atop the sedated T. rex .
Bayona said that animatronics " are very helpful on set , especially for the actors so they have something to perform against .
There 's an extra excitement if they can act in front of something real . "
Scanlan felt animatronics were not best for every scene : " In some ways it will have an impact on your shooting schedule ; you have to take time to film with an animatronic .
In the balance , we ask ourselves if it is economically and artistically more valuable to do it that way , or as a post - production effect .
Once we have looked at each particular case , with the director and the VFX supervisor we decide whether — because of the environment or the circumstances — it is the right way to go practically . "
Scanlan spent more than eight months at Pinewood Studios working on the creatures before and during filming , with a crew of approximately 35 people .
Scanlan 's team created functional animatronic models of the T. rex , the Indoraptor and Blue , while ILM worked on CGI versions of the creatures .
*
The T. rex was one of the first animatronic creatures needed for filming , in the form of a full - scale head and shoulders .
ILM sent Scanlan a model of the T. rex from its appearance in Jurassic World .
Scanlan used it to create a full - scale 3D print of the T. rex head and shoulders .
The life - sized T. rex animatronic , which had the ability to breathe and move its head , was controlled with joysticks .
It was used for a scene where the sedated creature is inside a cage while Owen and Claire attempt to retrieve blood from it .
The beginning shots of the scene were created using only the animatronic , while the ending shots solely used CGI .
The middle portion of the scene used a combination of the two methods .
Within the film 's story , the T. rex is portrayed as the same individual featured in previous films .
Trevorrow said , " We 've been following this same character since the beginning ; she 's the same T. rex that was in Jurassic Park and in Jurassic World .
She is iconic — not just because she 's a T. rex , but because she 's this T. rex . "
*
The Blue animatronic was created to lay down on an operating table , depicting the animal in an injured state while the character of Zia operates on the creature .
Up to 12 puppeteers , hidden under the operating table , were needed to control the animatronic during filming .
The scene was shot twice , with and without the Blue animatronic , and the two versions were later combined for a seamless effect .
In creating Blue through CGI , the animators referred to the animal 's appearance in the previous film .
According to Vickery , Blue 's movements were designed to resemble a dog : " You look at the way Blue cocks her head and looks up at you .
It 's exactly like a dog .
You 're trying to sort of connect the dinosaur with things that you understand as a human . "
* The Indoraptor was primarily created through CGI , while a practical head , neck , shoulders , foot and arm were created for close - up shots .
For some scenes , an inflatable Indoraptor stand - in was operated by two puppeteers on set , to be later replaced by a CGI version of the creature .
The Indoraptor was designed to have long human - like arms .
The creature is depicted as a quadruped and biped , with a height of approximately tall while standing on two legs .
Bayona chose black for the Indoraptors color because he wanted the creature to have the appearance of a black shadow , saying " it 's very terrifying when you see the Indoraptor in the dark because you can only see the eyes and the teeth . "
Scanlan 's team also made puppeteering aids , rod puppets , and several prop dinosaurs , all created by coordinating with Vickery to ensure a consistent result between the practical effects and CGI .
Animal motions that could not be perfected with puppetry , such as blinking , were created with computer technology .
Among the puppeteer dinosaurs were baby velociraptors used for a scene with Pratt .
The scene 's final , wider shots used two - wheeled , remote - controlled toys to stand - in for the baby raptors on set .
The toys included a spring which gave them the ability to jump .
The feature was used to get a genuinely startled reaction from Pratt .
Although motion capture was used in the previous film to depict velociraptors , ILM determined after several tests the technology would not be adequate for depicting dinosaurs in Jurassic World :
Fallen Kingdom .
They chose instead to use key frame animation done for the previous films .
However , some motion capture was done as a form of previsualization to aid Bayona .
ILM used key framing to create scenes involving a large number of dinosaurs and referred to high - speed photography of horses racing for aid in creating such scenes .
The fight scene between Blue and the Indoraptor , set in Maisie 's bedroom , was designed in London and key framed by ILM .
Jance Rubinchik , animation supervisor for ILM , said the fight was the " trickiest sequence " because of the lack of previsualization .
According to Bayona , a Brachiosaurus shown dying in the volcanic eruption is meant to be the same individual that is first seen in the original Jurassic Park .
The Brachiosaurus in the new film was created using the same animations from the 1993 film .
The dinosaur 's death was the last shot on the entire film to be finished ; Bayona and the post - production team worked through the night to perfect the scene 's colors and composition , shortly before the film 's release .
For advice on veterinary procedures and animatronic movements , the filmmakers sought a veterinary surgeon who had experience with African wildlife .
Jonathan Cranston , a Gloucestershire veterinary surgeon , was recommended for the position because of his experience with wildlife in South Africa .
He advised Bayona and the producers on how to choreograph several scenes to accurately depict complex veterinarian procedures that involved the dinosaurs .
Cranston also worked closely with Pratt , Howard , Pineda and Smith to teach them how to perform such procedures .
He also advised the puppeteers on creating subtle and authentic animal movements and worked with Bayona on two scenes .
Cranston was on set for 12 days , primarily at Pinewood Studios .
MARKETING Section::::Marketing .
A six - second clip from the film was released on November 22 , 2017 .
The first trailer was teased for release on November 30 , 2017 .
This was later confirmed to be incorrect .
Several teaser trailers and a behind - the - scenes featurette of the film were released in early December 2017 , before the release of a full - length trailer on December 7 .
That month , Universal launched a website for the Dinosaur Protection Group .
It included miscellaneous information about the group and its effort to save the island 's dinosaurs , as well as a video featuring Howard , Pineda and Smith as their characters .
The website was created by Timothy Glover and Jack Anthony Ewins , who created the Masrani Global website for Jurassic World .
A second trailer aired during Super Bowl LII on February 4 , 2018 .
A 30-second teaser trailer was released on April 13 , 2018 , announcing the release of a third full trailer on April 18 .
Several of the trailers and commercials for the film included scenes from the ending that depict the Tyrannosaurus rex and the Mosasaurus now loose in the world .
This frustrated Trevorrow , who preferred not to show such scenes before the film 's release .
Universal had the benefit of a global marketing campaign by its partners valued at $ 185 million , more than double the value of the previous film 's partner program .
The campaign included nine partners — Dairy Queen , Doritos , Dr Pepper , Ferrero SpA , Jeep , Juicy Fruit , Kellogg 's , M&M 's , and Skittles — who aired television commercials and sold products to promote the film .
The global marketing campaign consisted of 1.3 billion promotional items including 100 million boxes of Kellogg 's products and 15 million packages of Kinder Joy candy by Ferrero .
Dairy Queen , a returning partner from the previous film , sold " Jurassic Chomp " ice cream desserts in collectable cups , while Doritos and Dr Pepper marketed versions of their products that featured images of the film 's dinosaurs .
For Super Bowl LII , Trevorrow directed a Jeep commercial starring Goldblum featuring a T. rex .
Within 24 hours of its release , the commercial received 39.7 million online views , more than any film trailer watched online following its Super Bowl television debut .
Universal also teamed up with Amazon for a marketing stunt where a dinosaur - sized box was driven around Los Angeles on a truck to promote the film .
Licensing partners
Mattel , Lego , and Funko created toys based on the film .
Mattel produced a variety of toys , including dinosaurs and action figures , as well as Barbie dolls featuring the likeness of Pratt and Howard as their characters .
Mattel released a mobile app titled Jurassic World Facts as a tie - in to its dinosaur toys , which included symbols that could be scanned to collect facts about each creature .
Lego released a number of Lego sets and characters based on the film .
A video game , Jurassic World Evolution , was released simultaneously with the film .
A two - part virtual reality miniseries titled Jurassic World :
Blue , created by Felix & Paul Studios and Industrial Light and Magic , was released for Oculus VR headsets as a film tie - in , featuring Blue on Isla Nublar at the time of the volcanic eruption .
Trevorrow , Glover and Ewins created a website and campaign for " Extinction Now ! "
( the antithesis to the Dinosaur Protection Group ) , which was launched shortly before the film 's release .
The campaign included a found - footage clip of a Tyrannosaurus loose in San Diego , a reference to .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Jurassic World : Fallen Kingdom had its premiere at the WiZink Center in Madrid , Spain , on May 21 , 2018 .
The film 's international theatrical release began in Singapore and Malaysia on June 7 , the United Kingdom , India , Italy , South Korea and Angola on June 8 , and Pakistan on June 16 , 2018 .
The film was also released in the United States on June 22 , 2018 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Jurassic World : Fallen Kingdom was released digitally on September 4 , 2018 , and on Blu - ray , DVD , Blu - ray 3D and 4 K Blu - ray on September 18 , 2018 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Jurassic World : Fallen Kingdom grossed $ 416.8 million in the United States and Canada plus $ 888.2 million in other territories for a total worldwide gross of $ 1.305 billion , against a production budget in the range of $ 170–187 million .
The film crossed the $ 1 billion mark on July 5 , 2018 , becoming the 35th film of all - time to reach this milestone , and the seventh film for Universal .
It also made Universal the second studio ( after Disney ) to have at least two films in three different franchises make $ 1 billion worldwide , alongside The Fast and the Furious and Despicable Me .
UNITED STATES AND CANADA Section::::United States and Canada .
In December 2017 , a survey from Fandango indicated that Fallen Kingdom was one of the most anticipated films of 2018 .
Initial projections three weeks before its release had the film grossing between $ 130–150 million in its opening weekend in the United States and Canada , with BoxOffice magazine estimating a total of $ 325–380 million for its final domestic gross .
By the week of its release , the low - end projections had reached $ 135 million .
It was released on June 22 , 2018 , in 4,475 theaters ( the second - widest release ever behind Despicable Me 3 ) grossing $ 58.7 million on its opening day , the second - highest of the franchise and 28th - best on record .
The film grossed $ 15.3 million from Thursday night previews at 3,600 theaters , down from the $ 18.5 million grossed by Jurassic World .
It ended up debuting at $ 148 million , the 20th - best opening weekend of all - time and second highest for Universal .
It also marked the second time two films opened to over $ 100 million on back - to - back weekends , following Incredibles 2s $ 182.7 million debut the week before , since May 2007 when Shrek the Third and opened to $ 121.6 million and $ 114.7 million , respectively .
In its second weekend the film made $ 60 million , a drop of 59 % and less than the $ 105.8 million made by Jurassic World in its sophomore weekend .
In its third weekend it made $ 28.3 million .
OUTSIDE
NORTH AMERICA Section::::Outside North America .
Overseas , the film was released in 48 countries between June 6 and June 8 , 2018 , including France , Germany , South Korea , the United Kingdom , Italy , Russia , and Spain .
It was projected to gross $ 130–145 million on its opening weekend .
It made $ 20.2 million on its first day , including $ 1.4 million in France and $ 1 million in Indonesia .
In South Korea , it grossed $ 9.7 million ( ₩10.3 billion ) and sold over 1 million tickets , setting opening day records for both ( beating The Mummys ₩7.4 billion and s 980,000 ) .
It went on to have an international debut of $ 151.1 million , including $ 8 million from IMAX screenings .
Its largest opening markets were South Korea ( $ 27.2 million ) , the UK ( $ 19.9 million ) , France ( $ 10 million ) , Spain ( $ 9.5 million ) and Germany ( $ 9.1 million ) .
In China , the film was released on June 15 and made $ 34.4 million ( ¥ 220 million ) on its opening day , nearly double the first day total of its predecessor ( $ 17.5 million ) .
The film went on to open to $ 111.9 million ( ¥ 715 million ) , the fourth best - ever in the country for a Hollywood release ( behind The Fate of the Furious , Avengers : Infinity War and ) , and bringing its two week international total to $ 372.1 million , more than the entire lifetime gross of Jurassic Park III ( $ 368 million ) .
In its third week of international release the film made $ 106.7 million , bringing its total to $ 561.5 million .
China remained one of the top markets with $ 32.4 million ( a standard 71 % drop for Hollywood films in the country ) , while it was also released in Mexico ( $ 12.3 million ) , Brazil ( $ 9.2 million ) and Australia $ 7.9 million ) .
As of July 5 , 2018 , the film has grossed $ 245.5 million in China , making it the 5th highest grossing Hollywood film of all - time in the country .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , Fallen Kingdom holds an approval rating of 48 % based on 370 reviews , with an average rating of 5.5/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Jurassic World : Fallen Kingdom adds another set piece - packed entry to the blockbuster franchise , although genuinely thrilling moments are in increasingly short supply . "
On Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating to reviews , the film has a weighted average score of 51 out of 100 , based on 59 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A− " on an A+ to F scale , while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave it an 82 % overall positive score .
Varietys Owen Gleiberman called the film better than the first Jurassic World but wrote " ...
[ Fallen Kingdom ] ends up being just a so - so ride .
I hope the next one is an all - out ride — but that for the first time since Spielberg 's 1993 original , it 's actually a great one .
The audience for this series has proved that it will turn out in mega - droves . "
Lindsey Bahr of the Associated Press wrote , " Jurassic World : Fallen Kingdom will not stand up to rigorous scrutiny , and yet , it 's kind of an enjoyable , preposterous and thrilling ride that ticks through nostalgia beats like a shopping list . "
The Boston Globes
Ty Burr likened the film to a " Universal Studios theme park ride " noting , " It 's enough for a fun fright night at the movies but lacks anything else : character , mystery , wonder , danger .
The film 's a rush for an audience that only wants the high . "
In a more critical assessment , Peter Travers of Rolling Stone said " ...
this sequel has the perfunctory vibe that comes from filmmakers who cynically believe the public will buy anything T. rex - related , no matter how shoddy the goods or warmed - over the plot . "
Senior Editor Matt Goldberg of Collider also criticized the screenplay stating , " The film is too lazy to even bother with the modest housekeeping of explaining its characters ' motives . "
The Verges Bryan Bishop was equally critical , writing , "
Like its predecessor , Fallen Kingdom is overstuffed with ethical conundrums , and not sophisticated enough to fully engage with them ...
the movie 's villains become such cartoony caricatures that it 's impossible to take Fallen Kingdoms attempted philosophical musings seriously . "
Sam Machkovech of Ars Technica called the film a B movie consisting of " a sixth - grade sketchbook mash of dino - murder , cartoonish villains , and plot holes " , while Travis M. Andrews of The Washington Post said the film had " achieved the impossible : it makes dinosaurs boring . "
In a positive review , Scott Mendelson of Forbes wrote , " Fallen Kingdom is a gorgeous , mostly enjoyable blockbuster that looked great in IMAX .
That it does n't cash all the checks it tries to write is why it 's merely a good movie instead of a great one . "
Writing for The Hollywood Reporter , John DeFore also praised the film saying , " Finally making good on its name , J.A. Bayona 's Jurassic World :
Fallen Kingdom says goodbye to the park for good , not just carrying the de - extincted dinos off the island but freeing itself from the genre trappings of the previous four films .
" In a review for Empire , Ben Travis lauded the film giving it four out of five stars saying , " despite some familiar echoes of The Lost World , Fallen Kingdom also takes big , ballsy , irreversible strides , deriving tantalising logical conclusions from Michael Crichton 's original premise and setting up a brave new World for this trilogy 's final chapter .
Many reviewers singled out the scene where a lone Brachiosaurus , stranded on Isla Nublar , succumbs to the volcanic fumes while the characters helplessly watch from the departing ship , as " poignant " or " haunting " , especially given the species ' role in the first movie .
ACCOLADES
Teen Choice Awards !
scope="row " rowspan="4 " People 's Choice Awards SEQUEL Section::::Sequel .
An untitled sequel , known as Jurassic World 3 , is scheduled for release on June 11 , 2021 .
Trevorrow will direct the film , and write the screenplay with Emily Carmichael .
It is based on a story by Trevorrow and Connolly .
Trevorrow will also serve as executive producer with Steven Spielberg ; Marshall and Crowley will serve as producers .
Pratt and Howard will reprise their roles for the film .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official Dinosaur Protection Group website