FROZEN EVER
AFTER Frozen Ever After is a log flume attraction in Epcot at the Walt Disney World Resort and soon - to - be at Hong Kong Disneyland and Walt Disney Studios Park .
Part of the Norway Pavilion of the Epcot 's World Showcase section and Fantasyland at Hong Kong Disneyland , the attraction features scenes inspired by Disney 's 2013 animated film Frozen as well as the 2015 animated short Frozen Fever .
It opened on June 21 , 2016 and replaced the former Maelstrom attraction , utilizing the same ride vehicles and a similar track layout .
The attraction will open at Hong Kong Disneyland in 2020 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
On September 12 , 2014 , Walt Disney World officials announced that the Maelstrom attraction would be replaced by an attraction based on Frozen .
Maelstrom 's final day of operation was October 5 , 2014 .
In June 2015 , then - Disney Chief Operating Officer Tom Staggs revealed that plans for a Frozen attraction were discussed prior to the film 's release , but were accelerated after the film 's worldwide success .
On responding to whether converting a portion of the Norway pavilion into an attraction based on a fictional place was appropriate for World Showcase , Staggs stated : " If the goal is to give people a taste of something like Scandinavia with the Norway pavilion , then Frozen would only increase the extent to which people would be drawn to it .
To me it does n't seem out - of - character at all . "
Disney also released the first details on the new attraction and revealed its final name , " Frozen Ever After .
" The attraction uses the same ride vehicles and course that was used for Maelstrom .
The Audio - Animatronics figures for the attraction feature improvements in facial animation that were first used on the Seven Dwarfs Mine Train , which opened in 2014 at the Magic Kingdom .
The Audio - Animatronics are also the first ever all - electric Audio - Animatronics , with previous Audio - Animatronics using either pneumatics or hydraulics .
While there are no new songs in the attraction , some of the original songs from Frozen have revised lyrics written by the original composers .
On May 20 , 2016 , Disney Parks revealed that the attraction would open June 21 that year .
On November 22 , Disney Parks revealed that the attraction would open some time in summer 2020 at Hong Kong Disneyland .
RIDE EXPERIENCE Section::::Ride experience .
The Frozen
Ever After ride commemorates the anniversary of the day Princess Anna saved her sister , Queen Elsa , with an unselfish act of true love , thus thawing a frozen heart and ending the eternal winter .
To celebrate the event , Elsa bestowed an Official Summer Snow Day upon the Arendelle citizenry , inspiring the amusement ride .
Advertisements promoting the winter festival are visible to guests as they queue for the ride .
Guests travel through Wandering Oaken 's Trading Post and Sauna , where they find Oaken in the sauna waving to them .
Riders next board a boat and sail off into a winter wonderland , where they encounter Olaf and Sven greeting guests with a rendition of Do You Want to Build a Snowman ?
Guests then pass Grand Pabbie as he recounts the story of the film to a group of young trolls .
Riders next ascend a lift towards Elsa 's ice palace .
When they reach the top , they find Olaf ice skating and singing , For the First Time in Forever , failing comically with the lyrics .
Guests soon pass a singing Anna and Kristoff , while Sven sits on the side with his tongue stuck to a pole .
Two gates open and guests see Elsa , who is singing
Let It Go while conjuring ice .
The boats and riders then accelerate backwards , passing images of Elsa creating the ice palace .
Guests
next encounter Marshmallow and the Snowgies from Frozen Fever .
The boat moves forward as Marshmallow spits out mist , passing through the mist , and down a short drop .
Riders then pass Arendelle Castle with fireworks bursting over top .
Lastly , guests reach Anna , Elsa , and Olaf , who are singing In Summer , as they return to the village and disembark .
SEE ALSO
* List of Epcot attractions
* Norway Pavilion at Epcot
* List of Hong Kong Disneyland attractions REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS