THE SIMPSONS ( SEASON 29 )
The twenty - ninth season of the animated television series
The Simpsons premiered on Fox in the United States on October 1 , 2017 , and ended on May 20 , 2018 .
On November 4 , 2016 , The Simpsons was renewed for seasons 29 and 30 .
This season marked the show 's surpassing Gunsmoke as the longest - running scripted series in primetime television by number of episodes , with the series ' 636th episode " Forgive and Regret " .
The season features guest appearances from Norman Lear , Martin Short , Ray Liotta and Nikolaj Coster - Waldau .
In addition , Bill Plympton animated a sixth couch gag in " 3 Scenes Plus a Tag from a Marriage " , having previously done so in season 23 's " Beware My Cheating Bart " , season 24 's " Black Eyed , Please " , season 25 's " Married to the Blob " , season 27 's " Lisa the Veterinarian " , and season 28 's " 22 for 30 " .
This season also features Kelsey Grammer reprising his role as Sideshow Bob for a singing cameo and Homer seeking help from Shaquille O'Neal ( " Gone Boy " ) , and a song written by guest star Rachel Bloom ( " Springfield Splendor " ) .
The season also includes the Simpson family traveling to New Orleans for JazzFest ( " Lisa Gets the Blues " ) , and an episode that reimagines Stephen King 's It featuring Krusty the Clown ( " Fears of a Clown " ) .
On August 30 , 2017 , it was announced that longtime Simpsons score composer Alf Clausen was let go from the series .
The series switched from a live orchestrated score to a produced score by Bleeding Fingers Music .
Hans Zimmer and Russel Emanuel are score producers , with Steve Kofsky executive producing .
Clausen 's last episode was " Whistler 's Father " .
During February 2018 , episodes of The Simpsons were held back to avoid competing with the 60th Annual Grammy Awards , Super Bowl LII , the 2018 Winter Olympics , and the 90th Academy Awards .
This resulted in a nine - week gap in between new episodes , and is the second season to not have any new episodes airing in February , after the twenty - fifth season ( which also aired in a Winter Olympics year ) .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
REFERENCES