DEATH AND ALL HIS FRIENDS ( GREY 'S ANATOMY ) " Death and All His Friends " is the season finale of the sixth season of the American television medical drama Grey 's Anatomy , and the show 's 126th episode overall .
It was written by Shonda Rhimes and directed by Rob Corn .
The episode was originally broadcast on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States on May 20 , 2010 .
The episode was the second part of the two - hour season six finale , the first being Sanctuary , and took place at the fictional Seattle Grace Mercy West Hospital .
The original episode broadcast in the United States had an audience of 16.13 million viewers and opened up to universal acclaim .
The episode centers a shooting spree at the hospital by a former patient 's husband Gary Clark ( Michael O'Neill ) .
The episode marked the last appearances for Nora Zehetner and Robert Baker as Dr. Reed Adamson and Dr. Charles Percy respectively as both the characters were killed in the shooting .
In the episode Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) and Jackson Avery ( Jesse Williams ) try to save the life of Chief Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) who was shot by Gary Clark in front of Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) as she waits outside the OR with April Kepner ( Sarah Drew ) .
Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) tries to save Charles along with her patient Mary Portman ( Mandy Moore ) , while Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr. ) tries to get into the hospital .
Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) and Arizona Robbins ( Jessica Capshaw ) are stuck on a floor with all the younger patients of the hospital , Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) and Lexie Grey ( Chyler Leigh )
try to save the life of Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) who was shot as well and Owen Hunt ( Kevin McKidd ) and Teddy Altman ( Kim Raver ) try to get their patient to safety .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The hospital is hit with an unprecedented crisis : a shooter is in the hospital , and there is a lockdown .
Meanwhile , Dr. Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) discovers that she is pregnant , and Dr. Owen Hunt ( Kevin McKidd ) must choose between Teddy and Cristina ( Sandra Oh ) .
The shooter kills Reed Adamson and wounds Dr. Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) .
Lexie ( Chyler Leigh ) and Mark ( Eric Dane ) find the latter and try to save him .
Soon , it is revealed that the shooter , Gary Clark ( whose wife was a patient at the hospital and later died ) , is looking for Dr. Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) .
At the end , he shoots Derek , which is witnessed by Meredith , Cristina , and April .
With the crisis unfolding , each character is put through extreme trials and tribulations .
Cristina is put under pressure to save Derek , who is seriously injured .
Meanwhile , Dr. Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) and her patient Mary drag resident Charles Percy , who has been shot , through the hallway
but when they get to the elevators , they are off .
Bailey freaks out for a moment , then gathers herself and sits with Charles .
When he asks if he was dying , she said yes .
She tells him she and Mary are going to stay with him and that he is n't alone , with Charles dying soon thereafter .
The shooter walks into the OR where Cristina and Jackson are trying to save Derek .
Hunt shows up and Meredith tells him what was going on .
He looks through the window and says she is doing fine
but he 'd go in to see what he could do to help .
When Hunt goes inside , the audience is shown that Mr. Clark is in the room with a gun to Cristina 's head , shouting at her to stop fixing Derek .
Cristina and Avery refuse to stop working .
Mr. Clark tells Hunt that he 'd shoot him first and then Cristina but he really only wanted to kill Derek .
He believes this is retribution for his wife 's death , which he believes is on Derek 's hands .
Meredith then comes into the room and tells Mr. Clark to shoot her .
She explains that she is Lexie 's sister , she is the closest thing Webber
has to a daughter , and she is Derek 's wife .
He turns the gun toward Meredith , but Cristina says Meredith is pregnant .
Hunt makes a move toward Mr. Clark and is shot , knocking him unconscious .
Cristina and Avery then raise their hands and Avery tells Mr. Clark that Derek will die and he can watch it happen on the monitor .
Derek flatlines and Meredith cries almost hysterically .
Mr. Clark walks out .
April and Meredith work on cleaning Hunt 's gunshot wound .
April notices
Meredith is bleeding and asks if she 's been shot .
Meredith tells April she is having a miscarriage and continues to work on Hunt .
Clark later comes across Lexie , who is bringing supplies to help Alex , and when he attempts to shoot her , the recently arrived SWAT team wounds Clark .
This gives time for Lexie to escape .
Soon after , Webber walks through the halls of the hospital and finds several bodies .
In a room , he finds Mr. Clark , who tells him he 'd bought the gun at a superstore and bought extra ammo because it was on sale .
Mr. Clark tells Webber
he has one bullet left .
He reveals that he planned on shooting Webber , then himself .
Eventually , after Webber convinces Clark that his wife would n't want the shooting and would rather be reunited with him , Clark commits suicide as the SWAT team is directly out the door .
Meanwhile , in the operating room , Derek 's heartbeat returns to normal , and everyone is relieved .
Outside the hospital , Arizona and Callie reinstate their relationship when Callie says she does n't want to have a baby if it means she ca n't be with Arizona .
Arizona agrees to have a baby because she says that she does n't want to stop Callie from being an excellent mother .
Mark and Lexie show up at the other hospital .
Alex is out of surgery .
Lexie goes to Alex .
Mark watches Lexie take Alex 's hand .
Meredith takes another look at her positive pregnancy test , and throws it out .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The episode was written by showrunner Shonda Rhimes and directed by Rob Corn .
In an interview , Rhimes told that the writing of the two - part season six finale caused her struggle .
She elaborated on this :
TV Guide reported that Mandy Moore will check into Grey 's Anatomy 's two - hour season finale , adding , " She 'll play a patient named Mary as part of an explosive – and , of course , top secret – cliffhanger .
Bailey – who 's having one hell of a season as a newly single gal – will be her doctor , but beyond that , details are being kept under heavily guarded wraps .
" The news was later confirmed by Entertainment Weekly which further reported , " Bailey – who 's having one hell of a season as a newly single gal – will be her doctor , but beyond that , details are being kept under heavily guarded wraps .
She comes as part of a grand tradition of recognizable names as patients , usually quick , juicy roles like Sara Gilbert 's euthanized patient two weeks ago and Demi Lovato 's upcoming stretch as a schizophrenic .
Moore did that other hospital show , Scrubs " It was also reported a veteran actor Michael O'Neill would reprise his role as the grief - stricken widower Gary Clark .
O'Neill later in an interview said , " That role changed my career .
It was probably the hardest job I 've ever done , hardest work I 've ever done .
I had a tremendous resistance to it , and I almost turned the role down .
I was so afraid of that being sensationalized , and I did n't want that in the world .
I had n't worked with Shonda Rhimes , and so I did n't know .
I certainly knew she was a brilliant writer , but I did n't know what the intent was .
We had a conversation about it .
I said , ' You know what ?
Can I think about this and call you back tomorrow ? '
I called her back , and I said , ' Shonda , I just have to say it frightens me .
It really frightens me . '
She said , ' Michael , it frightens me too . '
I thought , OK , we 're at least starting at the same place .
Her writing was so good . ...
We saw the wound .
We got to see the wound that drove him mad , and I think that was terribly important .
It was important to show the fracture that brought this man to that desperate action . "
RECEPTION BROADCAST Section::::Reception .
Section::::Broadcast .
Death And All His Friends was originally broadcast on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States on May 20 , 2010 .
The episode was the second half of the two - hour season six finale , the other half being Sanctuary
It had an audience in The United States of 16.13 million viewers ( 5.9/17 Nielsen rating in its 9:00 Eastern time - slot .
REVIEWS
Section::::Reviews .
The episode opened up to universal acclaim with the television critics lauding the writing and performance of the entire cast as well .
The performances of guest stars Mandy Moore and Michael O'Neill along with Ellen Pompeo , Sandra Oh , Chandra Wilson , Kevin McKidd , James Pickens , Jr. and Sarah Drew garnered most praise .
Marsi from TVFanatic highly praised the episode and gave it five stars , and expressed that it may have been the best episode of the series , adding , " The writing and acting were absolutely stellar , and may lead to many Emmy nominations , but even more impressively , despite a killing spree , it remained distinctly Grey 's .
Some of the back - and - forths between the characters were truly memorable , and some of the developments so heartbreaking that we do n't even know where to begin now .
Seriously , the Season 6 finale left us laying awake afterward thinking about everything , a feeling we have n't had from Grey 's in years and rarely achieved by any program . "
John Kubicek of BuddyTV also noted that the finale was the best episode , adding , " [ It was ] two of the best hours of television all year .
It was certainly the best Grey 's Anatomy has ever been , which is saying a lot since I 'd written the show off for the past few years .
No show does a big traumatic event like Grey 's , and the shooter gave the show license for heightened drama with five major characters being shot over the two hours .
It was emotional , expertly paced and had me in tears for most of the finale . "
PopSugar called it " most intense episodes of Grey 's I have ever seen " adding , " What a whopper of an episode !
Can we talk about how gripping the scene is where Bailey and Percy are hiding from Mr. Clark ?
Then he turns around and gets Karev right in the chest .
Seriously , I have n't been so shocked by a one - two shooting spree since Michael shot Ana Lucia and Libby in rapid succession on Lost .
Another review from BuddyTV called the finale " Game - changing ! "
stating , " The finale that changes everything !
You do n't want to miss it !
To her credit GA creator and writer - of - this - episode Shonda Rhimes pretty much delivered on her promise .
I found myself with my heart in my mouth for the entire evening before finally being able to exhale as the credits rolled .
" The review lauded Ellen Pompeo and Sandra Oh adding , " The Twisted Sisters really were the showcase of the entire finale .
Meredith , sidelined for much of the season , took center stage " even calling Oh 's Cristina Yang a " rockstar " .
Entertainment Weekly wrote , " You 're still pondering how Grey 's can still be so damn good sometimes , " further hugely praising the episode , " They did a bang - up job , it felt real in every way , thanks to some stellar performances and writing .
And yet it maintained its Grey'sness thanks to some quieter moments and plenty of witty exchanges to boot . "
Regarding the Bailey - Mary - Charles sequence the site wrote , " the action felt so real " , but added , " But the most intense action was culminating in the OR with Cristina , April and Meredith had a nice moment sitting on the ground together , April sniffling and Meredith stonefaced .
Kevin McKidd did some stellar acting as he interacted with them . "
Talking about Meredith 's miscarriage the site added , " She saved Owen , though she did it while having a miscarriage — again , leave it to Grey 's to make this the least dramatic , most underplayed storyline of the night .
( Brilliantly so . ) "
Spoiler Junkie wrote highly of the episode Meredith Grey in particular saying , " In the most heart - wrenching moment of the entire two - hour season finale , Meredith bursts into the room , asking Clark to kill her .
Eye for an eye , she says .
She 's Lexie 's sister .
She 's like a daughter to Dr. Weber .
She 's the Chief 's wife . " and noted that " This was an amazing season finale , one of the best in the six seasons of Grey 's Anatomy .
The second hour of the Grey 's Anatomy Season 6 season finale , Death and All His Friends , is even more intense than the first . "
HitFix also lauded the episode and wrote , " In every sense , these two episodes where Shonda Rhimes , directors Stephen Cragg and Rob Corn , and the entire cast and crew of the show " Going For It " .
There was no opportunity for suspense , or tears , or anger , or horror , or some good old - fashioned monologuing left unexplored .
Huge stakes , huge emotions , great performances from everybody Chandra Wilson and Sandra Oh were particularly great , as was Michael O'Neill as shooter Gary Clark .
This was about as good as I 've ever seen " Grey 's .
" Episodes like these are what I point to when anyone asks me why I 'm still watching The site also lauded Ellen Pompeo 's character stating , " Meredith would suffer a miscarriage in the middle of patching up Owen Hunt 's bullet wound - and be so hard - core , just as her best friend was next door in risking death to save Meredith 's man , that she would just keep working even as blood dripped down her legs .
A moment like that works only if everyone involved is 100 % committed to the insanity of it , and here everyone was .
They all went for it and came up with a riveting two hours of TV .
At the completion of the eleventh season Wired named the episode in its must - watch list adding , " The show reaches its dramatic apex in a multi - episode arc about a deadly spree shooter who visits the hospital with a vendetta .
The repercussions of this incident will echo through most of Season 7 , and well into the future .
"
The site also called Pompeo 's ' Shoot Me .
I 'm Your Eye for an Eye . '
the best scene from the entire series .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS