CARNAGE PARK
Carnage Park is a 2016 American crime horror thriller film directed and written by Mickey Keating .
The film stars Ashley Bell , Darby Stanchfield , Pat Healy , and Alan Ruck .
Keating described Carnage Park as being a nod to films by Sam Peckinpah and Peter Watkins that were made in the 1970s , and he built the film around that concept .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1978 , two thieves , " Scorpion Joe " and Lenny , escape into the desert with a hostage , Vivian , after a failed heist .
Lenny dies of a gunshot wound suffered during their escape , and Joe forces Vivian to help him dispose of Lenny 's body .
After a failed escape attempt , Vivian explains that she was at the bank to seek a loan to save her family 's farm .
As she covertly reaches for a switchblade on the floor of Joe 's car , an unseen assailant shoots out one of the car 's tires .
Joe handcuffs Vivian to the steering wheel and exits the car , boasting that he will kill whoever shot at them .
The hidden sniper kills Joe , then drives up to talk to Vivian .
The sniper , Wyatt Moss , tells her that she is trespassing on private property , and insists he had a legal right to kill Joe .
Vivian begs him to free her , but he instead knocks her out with a drug .
Wyatt 's brother , the sheriff , visits Wyatt 's compound to ask if he has seen Vivian .
Wyatt denies any knowledge of her , and his brother warns him that she is too well - known for her murder to be hushed up .
When Vivian wakes , she is handcuffed to Joe 's corpse in the car .
She drags the corpse out of the car and uses a rock to smash the handcuff .
Once free , she wanders toward a PA system that has a record player attached .
When she plays the album on it , a recording of a siren , Wyatt takes several shots at her .
She takes off running , pursued by Wyatt .
After avoiding a trapped pit , Vivian finds an apparently dead woman who is holding a shiv .
Vivian grabs the weapon , startling the woman into semi - consciousness .
As Vivian attempts to revive her , Wyatt shoots and kills the woman .
The sheriff discovers Lenny 's body and loudly announces that he is entering the compound .
While Wyatt is distracted , Vivian surprises him with an attack , takes his rifle from him , and shoots him .
Leaving Wyatt for dead with his rifle , Vivian looks for an exit from the fenced - in compound .
She follows the cries of a injured man , discovering Travis stuck in a bear trap .
Though she frees him , he is unable to move .
Travis laments that he is still going to die , as the entire compound is surrounded by miles of electric fencing .
Vivian says she believes she has killed Wyatt and promises to return with help .
Nearby , she finds a shack that is filled with grisly trophies , such as human ears .
Wyatt taunts her on a CB radio , saying he knows she is in the shack , and she hears a gunshot .
As Wyatt laughs , she yells at him , drawing the attention of the sheriff , who is investigating the compound .
As he enters the shack , Vivian kills him , only to be horrified that it is not Wyatt .
Wyatt further taunts her , shooting at her as she attempts to pick up the sheriff 's nearby pistol .
Once she grabs it , she flees through a trapdoor that leads to a mine shaft .
Wyatt chases Vivian through the mine , which contains many dead bodies , dolls , and a PA system that plays distorted music .
Vivian hides among the dead bodies , then engages in a shoot - out with Wyatt , which causes a cave - in near him .
The lights go out , and Wyatt 's taunts her with manic laughter and militaristic rants .
Vivian reaches the end of the mine and breaks through a boarded up exit .
As she emerges into the daylight , she laughs hysterically .
A note says that Vivian escaped to safety , and dozens of bodies were eventually found in the compound ; however , Wyatt was never captured .
CAST * Ashley Bell as Vivian Fontaine * James Landry Hebert as Scorpion Joe * Michael Villar as Lenny
* Bob Bancroft as the bank manager
* Darby Stanchfield
* Pat Healy as Wyatt Moss * Alan Ruck - Sheriff Moss * Larry Fessenden as Travis PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On May 5 , 2015 , it was announced that Ashley Bell , Darby Stanchfield , Pat Healy , and Alan Ruck were cast in the leading roles in the film set in 1970s .
Filming began on May 11 , 2015 in Los Angeles .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film was initially screened at the January 2016 Sundance Film Festival and in March it was screened at the 2016 South by Southwest in Austin , Texas .
IFC Midnight has the U.S. distribution rights and has set the release date to July 1 , 2016 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Ben Kenigsberg of Variety wrote that Carnage Park " lands well south of John Waters in its try - anything - for - a - reaction pretensions " and that " Box office - wise , the movie has the potential to lure only the least suspecting of viewers . "
Carnage Park currently has 61 % on Rotten Tomatoes based on 18 critic reviews .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS