ME
BEFORE YOU Me
Before You is a romance novel written by Jojo Moyes .
The book was first published on 5 January 2012 in the United Kingdom .
A sequel titled After You was released 29 September 2015 through Pamela Dorman Books .
A second sequel , Still Me , was published in January 2018 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Twenty - six - year - old Louisa Clark lives with her working - class family .
Unambitious and with few qualifications , she feels constantly outshone by her younger sister , Treena , an outgoing single mother .
Louisa , who helps support her family , loses her job at a local café when the café closes .
She goes to the Job Centre and , after several failed attempts , is offered a unique employment opportunity : help care for Will Traynor , a successful , wealthy , and once - active young man who developed quadriplegia in a pedestrian - motorcycle accident two years earlier .
Will 's mother , Camilla , hires Louisa despite her lack of experience , believing Louisa can brighten his spirit .
Louisa meets Nathan , who cares for Will 's medical needs , and Will 's father , Steven , a friendly upper - class businessman whose marriage to Camilla is strained .
Louisa and Will 's relationship starts out rocky due to his bitterness and resentment over being disabled .
Things worsen after Will 's ex - girlfriend , Alicia , and best friend Rupert reveal that they are getting married .
Under Louisa 's care , Will gradually becomes more communicative and open - minded as they share experiences together .
Louisa notices Will 's scarred wrists and later overhears his mother and sister discussing how he attempted suicide shortly after Camilla refused his request to end his life through Dignitas , a Swiss - based assisted suicide organisation .
Horrified by his attempt , Camilla promised to honour her son 's wish , but only if he agreed to live six more months .
Camilla intends to prove that , in time , he will believe his life 's worth living .
Louisa conceals knowing about Will and Camilla 's agreement .
However , she tells Treena , and together they devise ways that will help convince Will to abandon his death wish .
Over the next few weeks , Will loosens up and lets Louisa shave his beard and cut his shaggy hair .
Louisa begins taking Will on outings and the two grow closer .
Through their frequent talks , Louisa learns that Will has travelled extensively ; his favourite place is a café in Paris .
Noticing how limited her life is and that she has few ambitions , Will tries to motivate Louisa to change .
Louisa continues seeing her longtime boyfriend of 6 years , Patrick , though they eventually break up due to her relationship with Will .
Meanwhile , Louisa 's father loses his job , causing more financial difficulties .
Mr. Traynor offers Mr. Clark a position .
Louisa realises that Will is trying to help her secure her freedom from her family .
The two attend Alicia and Rupert 's wedding where they dance and flirt .
Will tells Louisa that she is the only reason he wakes in the morning .
Louisa convinces Will to go on a holiday with her , but before they can leave , Will contracts near - fatal pneumonia .
Louisa cancels the plans for a whirlwind trip .
Instead , she takes Will to the island of Mauritius .
The night before returning home , Louisa tells Will that she loves him .
Will says he wants to confide something , but she admits that she already knows about his plans with Dignitas .
Will says their time together has been special , but he can not bear to live in a wheelchair .
He will be following through with his plans .
Angry and hurt , Louisa storms off and does not speak to him for the remainder of the trip .
When they return home , Will 's parents are pleasantly surprised by his good physical condition .
Louisa , however , resigns as his caretaker , and they understand that Will intends to end his life .
On the night of Will 's flight to Switzerland , Louisa visits him one last time .
They agree that the past six months have been the best in their lives .
He dies shortly after in the clinic , and it is revealed that he left Louisa a considerable inheritance , meant to continue her education and to fully experience life .
The novel ends with Louisa at a café in Paris , reading Will 's last words to her in a letter , that tell her to ' live well ' .
CHARACTERS * Louisa Clark – a 26-year - old woman who is creative , talented , and funny but underestimates herself and has few ambitions .
Her life changes when she begins working as a caretaker for a paralysed man .
Over time , she learns to harness her capabilities and step out of her limited comfort zone .
* William ( Will ) Traynor – a 35-year - old man who became quadriplegic after being hit by a motorbike .
He is intelligent and wealthy , but his impairment has left him moody , angry , and bitter .
Unable to accept never being the active and adventurous man he once was , he wants to end his life .
* Camilla Traynor – Will 's mother who has a strained relationship with her son .
She is severe and strict but she cares about her son 's well - being .
* Steven Traynor – Will 's father who was mostly absent from his children 's lives ; Camilla Traynor blames him for destroying their family .
He wants to divorce Camilla .
* Katrina ( Treena ) Clark – Louisa 's younger sister who is a single mother , who works at flower shop .
She has always been regarded as the most intelligent sibling .
Even though the sisters have always been competitive , they support each other .
* Patrick – Louisa 's boyfriend who works as a personal trainer .
He is obsessed with sports and diet .
* Nathan – Will 's nurse and caretaker who is also his friend .
* Bernard Clark – Lou 's father .
* Josephine – Lou 's mother .
* Alicia Dewar – Will 's ex - girlfriend who marries his colleague , Rupert .
She is beautiful and delicate , but lives her life according to the standards of upper society .
* Georgina Traynor – Will 's sister who lives and works in Australia .
* Rupert Freshwell – An old friend of Will 's from work .
He marries Will 's old girlfriend , Alicia .
* Frank – Louisa 's previous employer at the bakery where she worked before meeting Will .
* Thomas – Louisa 's young nephew and the son of her sister Katrina , a single mother .
* Major Timothy Dewar –
Alicia Dewar 's father .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The book was placed on the Richard and Judy Book Club .
Disability advocates have criticised the book and film for suggesting that life may not be worth living for some with severe disabilities .
FILM ADAPTATION Section::::Film adaptation .
In 2014 MGM announced it would make a film adaptation of Me Before You , to be directed by Thea Sharrock and released via
Warner Bros. The film was initially set to release in August 2015 but was pushed back to 3 June 2016 .
Emilia Clarke and Sam Claflin portray the main characters , and filming began in the spring of 2015 .
The film has grossed over $ 200 million worldwide .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Me Before You on Penguin Books site
* Jojo Moyes official website