BATES MOTEL ( SEASON 5 )
The fifth and final season of Bates Motel premiered on February 20 , 2017 , and concluded on April 24 , 2017 .
The season consisted of 10 episodes and aired on Mondays at 10 p.m. ET / PT on A&E.
The series itself is described as a " contemporary prequel " to the 1960 film Psycho , following the life of Norman Bates and his mother Norma prior to the events portrayed in the Hitchcock film .
However , the final season of the series loosely adapts the plot of Psycho .
The series takes place in the fictional town of White Pine Bay , Oregon .
The season was released on Blu - ray and DVD on September 19 , 2017 .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* Vera Farmiga as Mother * Freddie Highmore as Norman Bates * Max Thieriot as Dylan Massett
* Olivia Cooke as Emma Decody * Nestor Carbonell as
Alex Romero SPECIAL GUEST
* Rihanna as Marion Crane RECURRING
* Kenny Johnson as Caleb Calhoun
* Ryan Hurst as Chick Hogan * Brooke Smith as Sheriff Jane Greene
* Isabelle McNally as Madeleine Loomis
* Austin Nichols as Sam Loomis * Jillian Fargey as Maggie Summers * Damon Gupton as Dr. Gregg Edwards
* Natalia Cordova - Buckley as Julia Ramos
GUEST
* Carlton Cuse as Highway Patrol Officer
* John Hainsworth as Jim Blackwell
* Antonio Cayonne as Bruce Herman PRODUCTION CASTING Section::::Production .
Section::::Casting .
In June 2016 , showrunner Kerry Ehrin confirmed the return of Kenny Johnson as Caleb Calhoun for the final season , in an interview with Deadline Hollywood .
The following month , it was announced that Rihanna had been cast in the iconic role of Marion Crane .
In September 2016 , Isabelle McNally joined the cast of the series , portraying the role of Madeleine Loomis , a young woman who resembles Norma .
That same month , Brooke Smith joined the cast as Sheriff Jane Greene .
In January 2017 , Austin Nichols was cast in the role of Sam Loomis , a prominent role in both the source material and the film adaptation .
That same month , Ryan Hurst 's return as Chick Hogan was reported .
In March 2017 , it was revealed that series executive producer Carlton Cuse would appear as a police officer trailing Marion Crane .
That same month , Natalia Cordova - Buckley joined the cast as Julia Ramos , an attorney .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
The series was filmed on location in Aldergrove , British Columbia .
At the beginning of the first season , a replica of the original Bates Motel set from the film Psycho was built on 272nd Street .
Freddie Highmore was tapped to write an episode for the season , as well as direct an episode , marking his directorial debut .
Max Thieriot and Nestor Carbonell were also tapped to direct an episode each for season 5 .
Production on the season began on September 16 , 2016 .
The series filmed its final scenes at the specially - built Bates Motel set in Aldergrove on January 25 , 2017 , and production began tearing the house down the following day .
Carbonell filmed his final scenes as Sheriff Alex Romero on January 27 , 2017 .
Filming officially wrapped for the series on January 31 , 2017 .
In February 2017 , the Bates Motel exterior set in Aldergrove was subsequently demolished .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The season has received positive reviews from television critics .
It received 81 out of 100 from Metacritic , based on 8 reviews , indicating " universal acclaim " .
Review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported that 8 out of 8 critical responses were positive , averaging a 100 % rating .
RATINGS
Section::::Ratings .
Overall , the fifth season of Bates Motel averaged 1.29 million viewers , with a 0.5 rating in the 18–49 demographic .
* A Cable Live +3 data is used here as Live +7 was not made available .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
In its fifth and final season , Bates Motel was nominated for one award . !
width=4
%
Year ! width=25
%
Awards ! width=29
% Category ! width=31
% Nominee(s ) !
width=8 % Result !
width=3 % class = unsortable Ref .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS