ATTACK ON TITAN ( FILM )
PLOT
PART 1 Section::::Plot .
Section::::Part 1 .
One hundred years ago , the Titans suddenly appeared and decimated most of humanity .
To stop their advance , humanity built a series of walls and lived peacefully there for another 100 years .
In the present day village of Monzen , Eren expresses to his friends , Armin and Mikasa , his desire to leave the confines of the Outer Wall and see the outside world .
After their failed attempt to approach the wall , Souda , the captain of the Garrison , explains to them that the military is assembling a scouting regiment to explore beyond the walls .
However , the wall is suddenly attacked by the Colossal Titan .
The wall is breached and Titans enter the village , eating people and getting back up despite being injured .
When Mikasa tries to rescue a baby , she is separated from Eren , and is presumed killed .
Two years later , Eren and Armin enter the Scout Regiment , along with Sasha , Jean , and others .
The team , led by Military Police Commander : Kubal , move out into one of the towns of the Outer Wall .
The group is then attacked by Titans but are saved by Captain Shikishima and Mikasa , who survived the attack from two years ago and is now part of the Scouts .
Eren eventually confronts Mikasa and she reveals to him that the experience made her realize the world is cruel .
After realizing that Mikasa and Shikishima are most likely together , Eren is once again devastated .
When more Titans surprise them , Kubal retreats , leaving the Scouts to fend for themselves .
Lil , who had just lost her lover , sacrifices herself .
Jean attempts to convince Eren to flee , but Eren chooses to fight back before losing his leg in the process .
Eren manages to save Armin from being eaten but at the cost of his own life .
Though crushed by Eren 's death , Mikasa keeps fighting until she runs low on fuel and comes face to face with the same Titan that ate Eren .
However , a Titan emerges from within it and begins battling the other Titans .
Souda and Mikasa realize that the Titan is Eren .
After he starts to collapse , Mikasa frees Eren from his Titan shell .
PART 2 Section::::Part 2 .
Years before , a young Eren is forcibly injected with an experimental serum by his father , but soon after Eren 's mother discovers this , a military police squad break in and kill Eren 's parents .
Eren survives with the help of Souda .
In the present , Eren is captured by Kubal and his squadron , believing he is a threat to humanity .
Armin tries to convince Kubal of Eren 's innocence but is ignored .
Before Eren is executed , another intelligent Titan appears , seemingly killing Kubal and his squadron before fleeing with Eren .
Eren awakens in a mysterious bunker with Shikishima , who reveals the origins of the Titans as a military experiment gone wrong that soon developed into a virus that decimated humanity and his plans to launch a coup against the corrupted government .
Eren agrees to help .
Eren , Shikishima , and his troops reunite with Mikasa and the others .
Shikishima attempts to recruit them into his coup , but when the true sinister purpose behind his plan is revealed , Eren backs out .
The remaining regiment neutralize Shikishima 's troops and Shikishima reveals himself to be the Titan that took Eren earlier .
Eren transforms into his Titan form and battles the Shikishima Titan , with Eren emerging victorious in the end .
Titan Eren proceeds to climb the wall and plants a bomb to create a massive blockage to prevent more Titans from entering .
Having survived the earlier attack , Kubal attempts to stop the group but is shot by Sasha , forcing him to transform into the Colossal Titan .
As Eren , Jean , and Mikasa battle
the Colossal Titan , Shikishima reappears in his Titan form and sacrifices himself by lodging the bomb into the Colossal Titan 's mouth , killing them both .
The detonation successfully closes the hole in the wall and Eren and Mikasa stand at the top of the wall overlooking the ocean .
In a post - credits scene , footage of the battle with the Colossal Titan is analyzed , in Shikishima 's bunker , by an off - screen character , who says that Eren and Mikasa 's unpredictability is what makes them " fascinating " .
CAST * Haruma Miura as Eren , a young man who dreams of one day leaving the walls
* Kiko Mizuhara as Mikasa , Eren 's childhood friend .
It was thought that she had been killed in the initial wall breach at Monzen , but she reappears as part of the Scout Regiment under Shikishima .
* Hiroki Hasegawa as Shikishima , the captain of the Scout Regiment .
* Kanata Hongō as Armin , Eren 's childhood friend .
He has an interest in mechanical stuff .
* Takahiro Miura as Jean , a soldier who gets into a scuffle with Eren .
* Nanami Sakuraba as Sasha , a soldier who enjoys food , especially potatoes .
She uses a long bow .
* Satoru Matsuo as Sannagi , a soldier who uses an axe where he cuts the heels of the Titans .
* Shu Watanabe as Fukushi , one of the soldiers .
* Ayame Misaki as Hiana , one of the female soldiers .
It is later revealed she joined the Scouts in order to provide for her daughter .
Later , she is eaten by a titan .
*
Rina Takeda as Lil , one of the female soldiers , she and another soldier are a couple .
*
Pierre Taki as Souda , a former captain in the Garrison when the walls are breached at Monzen .
* Satomi Ishihara as Hans , the weapons chief and a leader in the Scout Regiment .
She typically wears goggles and first appears where she demonstrates the omni - directional mobility gear .
* Jun Kunimura as Kubal , the director in the military forces .
Section::::Cast .
Some characters that were featured in the original manga and anime were dropped due to the film 's setting having been changed from Germany to Japan .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
The film was announced on October 2011 , with a planned release date in 2013 and in December of the same year it was announced that it would be a live action film and that Tetsuya Nakashima would direct .
On December 2012 it was announced that Nakashima had left as director because of creative differences .
On December 2013 , Shinji Higuchi was revealed as the new director and Yuusuke Watanabe as the screenwriter .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography was expected to start in 2014 and the film was now expected to be released in 2015 .
A car commercial featuring the Titans and directed by Higuchi was also announced and broadcast on January 2014 on Nippon TV , reaching more than 5 million views on YouTube in four days .
Haruma Miura was revealed as part of the cast in April and in July it was announced that there would be two films .
The first images of the actors in character were revealed in November .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Shiro Sagisu composed and scored an original motion - picture soundtrack , which compiled into one whole soundtrack .
The theme songs of the films are " Anti - Hero " and " SOS " , respectively , both performed by Sekai no Owari .
The film 's soundtrack goes under the name " Attack on Titan ( Shinji Higuchi 's Original Motion Picture Soundtrack ) " .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The first film was released in Japan on August 1 , 2015 .
It was released by Madman Entertainment in Australia and New Zealand on August 27 , 2015 .
Funimation Entertainment has licensed the rights for both films in North America , Central America , and South America and hosted the world premiere of the first film on 14 July at Grauman 's Egyptian Theatre in Los Angeles , California .
Director Shinji Higuchi and stars Haruma Miura and Kiko Mizuhara attended the red carpet premiere .
Funimation had announced its screening dates for the films .
Attack on Titan : Part 1 screened in a limited engagement beginning on 30 September 2015 and Attack on Titan : Part 2 screened three weeks later on 20 October 2015 .
The second part , entitled End of the World , was released on 19 September 2015 .
It was released on October 1–7 for Australia and New Zealand .
The second film did poorly at the japanese box office , relative to the first part - the first film made $ 4.8 million in its opening week at the Japanese box office , and the second did $ 2.7 million .
For its DVD and Blu - ray release in the United States , which included English dubs of both films , Part 1 was released on October 4 , 2016 and Part 2 released on December 6 , 2016 .
MARKETING Section::::Marketing .
A teaser trailer was released in March 2015 and a trailer was released in April .
Another trailer was released in June , which revealed that the film will be given an IMAX release in Japan and internationally .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
Part I was number - one on its opening weekend , with .
It was the seventh highest - grossing Japanese made film at the Japanese box office in 2015 , with ( ) .
and the 17th highest - grossing film at the Japanese box office for that year .
Part II underperformed at the box - office , having grossed ¥ 2.1 billion less than the total gross of the first film within first three weeks of release .
Combined , the films have grossed ¥ 4.93 billion ( $ 46 million ) .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Lee Edmund of South China Morning Post , said that the film was " One of the most perversely original fantasy movies in recent memory , this adaptation of a Japanese manga series is a schizophrenic mix of genres . "
Hope Chapman of Anime News Network also praised the movie .
" Outstanding and immersive aesthetic unlike any other horror movie , swiftly paced and gripping start to finish , sharp script with heavy thematic undertones , holds up completely as its own work of art divorced from the source material . "
Brian Ashcraft of Kotaku said " The First Attack on Titan Movie Stinks " .
Piera Chen of The Hollywood Reporter called the film " a visually refreshing blockbuster undermined by clichés . "
Derek Elley of Film Business Asia gave it a 7 out of 10 rating and called it " a trash - horror fantasy that 's a big - budget B picture . "
SFX artist Yoshihiro Nishimura and director Shinji Higuchi responded to some critics , with Nishimura responding to unfavourable comparisons of the film 's special effects with Hollywood 's standards thus : " I 'm sorry , but deciding what movies to see based on their budget , and comparing everything to Hollywood , that 's like how some people feel secure buying
Okame natto when they go to the supermarket " .
Higuchi referenced one critic of the film 's characters , saying " who 's the idiot who gave this guy an early release of the film ? ! "
On Rotten Tomatoes , Attack on Titan : Part 1 received a 58 % approval rating based on 12 reviews , with an average rating of 6.5/10 .
Part 2 received a 57 % approval rating based on 7 reviews , with an average rating of 6/10 .
SUBTITLE CONTROVERSY
Section::::Subtitle controversy .
Attack on Titan : Part 1 received criticism from San Francisco , Ohio , Kentucky , and Wisconsin theater attendees due to a subtitle ( " I 've been waiting for this day ! " )
freezing in the first ten minutes of the film and continued to stay frozen for a majority of the film due to a software problem .
As a consequence , Funimation announced that they would hardsub Part 2 and all future releases .
However , others have reported the subtitles working properly in other states .
Funimation has reported that fewer than 2 % of theaters have been affected by the freeze .
REMAKE Section::::Remake .
In January 2017 , it was reported that Warner Bros. was in negotiations to secure the film rights to the Attack on Titan franchise .
Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them
producer David Heyman would be on board to produce a proposed two - film project that would remake the 2015 Japanese live - action film adaptations .
However , the following day , a Kodansha representative denied this report to be true , but said there were other projects in negotiations .
On October of the same year , Warner Bros. finalized a deal with Kodansha , as well as announcing Andy Muschietti to direct , with Heyman , Masi Oka , and Barbara Muschietii ( the director 's sister ) to produce .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS