RAMPAGE ( 2018 FILM )
Rampage is a 2018 American science fiction monster film directed by Brad Peyton , and loosely based on the video game series of the same name by Midway Games .
The film stars Dwayne Johnson , Naomie Harris , Malin Åkerman , Jake Lacy , Joe Manganiello , and Jeffrey Dean Morgan .
It follows a primatologist named Davis Okoye who must team up with George , an albino gorilla who turns into a raging creature of enormous size as a result of a rogue experiment , to stop two other mutated animals , a gray wolf and an American crocodile , from destroying Chicago .
It is the third collaboration between Peyton and Johnson , following ( 2012 ) and San Andreas ( 2015 ) .
Principal photography began in April 2017 in Chicago .
The film was released in the United States on April 13 , 2018 , by Warner Bros. Pictures and New Line Cinema , in 2D , RealD 3D and IMAX .
It has grossed over $ 426 million worldwide and received mixed to positive reviews from critics , with praise for Johnson and Morgan 's performances and the visual effects , but criticism of the screenplay and storyline .
It is the all - time best reviewed film based on an arcade game , currently sitting at 52 % on review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Athena-1 , a space station owned by gene manipulation company Energyne , is destroyed after a laboratory rat mutates and wreaks havoc .
Dr. Kerry Atkins , the lone surviving crew member , is ordered by CEO Claire Wyden to retrieve research canisters containing a pathogen .
Atkins is able to flee in the escape pod when the station implodes , but due to damage from the rat it disintegrates upon re - entry , killing her .
The falling pieces leave a trail of debris across the United States , including the Everglades in Florida , where a canister is consumed by an American crocodile , and a forest in Wyoming , where a gray wolf is exposed to the pathogen .
Primatologist Davis Okoye , a former US Army Special Forces soldier and member of an anti - poaching unit , works at the San Diego Wildlife Sanctuary .
He has befriended a rare albino western lowland gorilla named George , having saved him from poachers , and communicates with George using sign language and hand gestures .
At night , one of the canisters crash - lands in George 's habitat , and George is exposed to the pathogen .
George grows considerably larger and more aggressive over time .
Davis is contacted by Dr. Kate Caldwell , a genetic engineer , who explains that the pathogen was developed by Energyne to rewrite genes on a massive scale .
She had hoped to advance CRISPR research as a potential cure for diseases but discovered Energyne 's plans to use it as a biological weapon .
The company fired her and got her sent to prison for attempting to expose them .
George escapes from captivity and goes on a rampage at the preserve .
Davis calms him down , but George is captured by a government team led by Agent Harvey Russell and put on an airplane .
Meanwhile , Claire and her brother , Brett , send a squad of mercenaries to capture the mutated wolf , Ralph , but they are all killed .
Claire , hoping to capture Ralph and use George to kill Kate so they can cover up their plans , uses a massive transmitter atop the Willis Tower to lure all three of the animals — who have been engineered to respond aggressively to a certain radio frequency — to Chicago .
George reacts violently to the sound and causes the plane to crash , though Davis , Kate , and Russell parachute to safety .
George , who also survives the crash , joins Ralph as they make their way to Chicago .
Davis and Kate are aided by Russell in stealing a military helicopter to go to Chicago themselves .
By the time they arrive , George and Ralph are tearing through the city , with the military struggling to contain the two .
The situation worsens when the mutated crocodile , Lizzie , arrives and joins George and Ralph .
Davis and Kate make a plan to steal a counter - serum , hoping that they can turn the mutated animals back to normal .
They are able to reach Energyne headquarters at the Willis Tower and take several vials of the serum , but they are caught by Claire and Brett .
Claire reveals that the serum only eliminates the animals ' enhanced aggressiveness rather than revert them to their normal sizes , meaning that the other resulting effects and mutations caused by the pathogen are completely irreversible .
Claire shoots Davis , but he survives .
When George climbs up to the top of the tower , Claire orders Davis to distract him while she attempts to escape with Kate held hostage at gunpoint .
Kate slips a vial into Claire 's handbag and pushes her towards George , who swallows Claire alive along with the serum , killing her and eventually resulting in George returning to his normal personality .
Below , Russell takes incriminating evidence from Brett and lets him escape , albeit into the path of falling debris which crushes Brett to death .
As the tower topples from damage , Davis and Kate survive by hovering in a damaged helicopter amidst the shower of debris .
With George now returned to his normal personality , Davis stays in the city to help him defeat the other two monsters , while Kate and Russell rush to prevent the military from deploying a MOAB against the creatures .
George and Davis trick Ralph into flying into Lizzie 's jaws , which decapitates him , but George is overpowered by Lizzie and is then heavily wounded by being impaled into a rebar , but survives .
Davis distracts Lizzie but is nearly killed himself before George stabs Lizzie 's brain by skewering her with the rebar through an eyehole , killing her .
With the threat neutralized , the airstrike is aborted .
In the aftermath , George and Davis , joined by Kate and Russell , help clear the city of debris and evacuate civilians .
CAST * Dwayne Johnson as Davis Okoye , a former US Army Special Forces soldier as well as primatologist and head of an anti - poaching unit .
* Naomie Harris as Dr. Kate Caldwell , a disgraced genetic engineer who teams up with Okoye .
* Jeffrey Dean Morgan as Harvey Russell , a government agent who works for the " Other Government Agency " .
* Malin Åkerman as Claire Wyden , the CEO of Energyne responsible for the infection and mutation of George , Ralph , and Lizzie with the mutagenic serum for Project : Rampage .
* Jake Lacy as Brett Wyden , Claire 's dimwit brother .
* Joe Manganiello as Burke , the leader of a private military group .
* P. J. Byrne as Nelson , a scientist and friend of Okoye .
* Marley Shelton as Dr. Kerry Atkins , a scientist and astronaut .
* Jason Liles as the motion - capture of George , an albino gorilla similar to Snowflake and one of the animals affected by a strange chemical that mutates them into colossal - sized monsters .
* Demetrius Grosse as Colonel Blake
* Jack Quaid as Connor * Breanne Hill as Amy * Matt Gerald as Zammit * Will Yun Lee as Agent Park
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Warner Bros. acquired the film adaptation rights to the 1986 arcade game Rampage in 2009 , as part of their acquisition of Midway Games for $ 33 million .
The project was announced in November 2011 , with John Rickard set as a producer .
Rickard would state
he decided to work on the movie by searching the list of titles Warner earned the adapting rights , and upon finding Rampage , remembering playing the arcade .
In June 2015 , Deadline Hollywood reported that Dwayne Johnson was set to star , re - teaming with New Line and producer Beau Flynn , while the studio was looking for a director to start production in mid-2016 .
Johnson mentioned that he loved the game as a kid , playing the arcade in a pool hall and later owning it on the Nintendo Entertainment System .
During the search for a script , writers offered many takes , including a faithful one to the game where the monsters were mutated humans , before the producers settled on the one by Ryan Engle , who aimed to make a " love letter to the monster movies I grew up watching " , such as Jaws and Jurassic Park , while making it clear that the animals were not the heroes .
In July 2015 , it was reported that New Line was in talks with Brad Peyton to direct and produce .
Peyton later stated that the film would " be a lot more emotional , a lot scarier and a lot more real than you 'd expect . "
Between January and July 2017 , the rest of the supporting cast was assembled .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography on the film began on April 17 , 2017 , in Chicago , Illinois .
The film also shot in Atlanta , Georgia .
Easter eggs to the original game were featured , as Energyne 's offices have a Rampage arcade , George eats a person who he pulls out of a building he punched , and Claire is devoured while wearing a red dress , just as the woman featured in the arcade 's opening screen .
VISUAL EFFECTS Section::::Visual effects .
The visual effects were primarily provided by Weta Digital .
Effects supervisor Erik Winquist and a small crew travelled to Chicago to create a model of the Chicago Loop that would be destroyed in the climactic battle , learning the building materials and architecture styles .
Up to 15,000 photographs were taken with 3D scanners , while motion cameras covered downtown Chicago .
As reference for the building destruction , the artists studied both the World Trade Center attacks and implosions of buildings affected by the 2016 Kaikoura earthquake in Weta 's hometown of Wellington .
One of the more challenging aspects for Weta was figuring out how the weight and mass of the monsters would affect the city environment and destruction .
Given Weta had plenty of experience creating animated apes in King Kong and Rise of the Planet of the Apes and its sequels Dawn and War , it helped the studio create George " in a much shorter time than it may have 10 years ago , " according to Winquist .
Motion capture coach Terry Notary even took a break from , which was also filmed in Atlanta , to help Jason Liles in his performance as George .
On the other hand , the lack of motion capture for Ralph and Lizzie let the animators go loose with how these monsters were portrayed , such as " a wolf that has porcupine spines and wings " .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The music was composed by Andrew Lockington .
The film marked the 6th collaboration with director Brad Peyton .
An exclusive track was also released by Kid Cudi titled " The Rage " which plays in the film 's end credits .
The soundtrack was released digitally on 13 April 2018 by WaterTower Music .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Rampage was released on April 13 , 2018 , in 3D and IMAX , by Warner Bros. Pictures , after initially being set for release a week later , on April 20 .
The release date was moved up after had also shifted its release up by a week , to April 27 , so as to provide Rampage with a two - week cushion .
The film was coincidently released 3 weeks after Pacific Rim Uprising , another American Kaiju film .
As part of the promotion , three new games were made available ; one is a Browser game called " Rampage : City Smash " , another an arcade beat - em up playing more as a redemption game , was made available on Dave & Buster 's , and a free VR game called " Project Rampage VR " .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Rampage was released on Digital HD on June 26 , 2018 , and on 4 K UHD , Blu - ray 3D , Blu - ray and DVD on July 17 , 2018 .
To date , Rampage has sold $ 22.3 million worth of DVDs and Blu - rays in North America .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Rampage grossed $ 99.4 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 326.9 million in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 426.3 million , against a production budget of $ 120 million plus another $ 140 million for the marketing budget .
In the United States and Canada , Rampage was released alongside the openings of Truth or Dare and , as well as the wide expansion of Isle of Dogs , and was projected to gross $ 35–40 million from 3,950 theaters in its opening weekend .
The film made $ 11.5 million on its first day ( including $ 2.4 million from Thursday night previews ) , $ 13.9 million on Saturday , and a total of $ 34.5 million over the weekend , finishing first at the box office .
Like many films starring Johnson , the audience demographics were diverse , with 43 % being Caucasian , 21 % Hispanic , 19 % African American and 14 % Asian .
The film dropped 41 % in its sophomore weekend to $ 21 million , finishing second behind A Quiet Place , which was in its third week .
In its third weekend the film fell 64 % to $ 7.1 million , finishing fourth .
It fell 35 % in its fourth weekend , grossing $ 4.6 million and finishing fifth .
In its fifth weekend it fell just 27 % and grossed $ 3.3 million and finished seventh .
Internationally , the film opened day - in - date in 41 markets , and made $ 25.4 million over its first two days .
In China , where it was projected to have a $ 60 million debut , it made $ 15.7 million in its first day , the third - ever highest for a Warner Bros. film .
It went on to have a foreign debut of $ 114.1 million ( for a global total of $ 148.6 million ) in 61 countries .
Its top markets were China ( $ 55 million ) , the UK ( $ 5.7 million ) , Korea ( $ 5.7 million ) , Mexico ( $ 4.8 million ) and Malaysia ( $ 3.5 million ) .
In its second weekend overseas , it again topped the international box office with $ 57 million crossing $ 200 million , in which China brings $ 106 million alone .
In China it grossed $ 27 million in its sophomore weekend dropping 50 % , but nonetheles topped the box office .
In its third frame overseas , it fell 72.6 % and grossed $ 16.2 million from 61 markets .
In its fourth weekend overseas , it grossed $ 13.7 million from 63 markets .
The film opened in the Philippines atop the box office with $ 1.7 M , and in France it opened at second place behind with $ 2.3M.
In China it has grossed $ 156 million , making it Warner Bros. ' second - biggest film ever in the market .
It fell just 6 % in France in its second weekend and has a total gross of $ 4.8 million .
It opened in Germany with $ 1.6 million and ranking No.2 at the box office .
As of May 20 , the film 's largest markets after China were Mexico ( $ 12.8 million ) , United Kingdom ( $ 12.4 million ) , Korea ( $ 11.2 million ) and Malaysia ( $ 7.9 million ) .
It opens in Japan on May 18 as its final market .
The film was released in Japan on May 18 , 2018 and debuted to $ 1.8 million .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 52 % based on 239 reviews , and an average rating of 5.4/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Rampage is n't as fun as its source material , but the movie 's sheer button - mashing abandon might satisfy audiences in the mood for a brainless blockbuster .
" It is the best - reviewed live - action video game film in the history of the site .
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 45 out of 100 , based on 46 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A− " on an A+ to F scale , while PostTrak reported adult and children filmgoers gave it respective overall positive scores of 90 % and 86 % .
Varietys Peter Debruge gave the film a moderately positive review , saying , " However derivative it may be , Rampage knows its audience — namely , Transformers fans and kids born after 9/11 for whom elaborately orchestrated scenes of falling skyscrapers carry nary a whiff of real - world trauma ...
What director Peyton lacks in artistic vision
he compensates for in his ability to wrangle such a CG - intensive production . "
Brian Tallerico of RogerEbert.com gave the film 2.5/4 stars , and wrote that " when Johnson is doing that movie action star thing he does so well and giant animals are going enormous - mano - a - enormous - mano , there 's undeniably goofy fun to be had .
You just have to be patient during the downtime . "
The Mir Fantastiki review gave the movie 7/10 , claiming it 's a stupid movie , but one that 's good at what it 's supposed to be , and honest about not being any more than that .
Conversely , Michael Phillips of the Chicago Tribune gave the film 1.5 out of 4 stars , and said , " Rampage is a drag .
Three times during the thing , I wrote down the phrase ' NO FUN , ' with increasingly impatient underlines .
" In an article for The Hollywood Reporter , Nick Allen wrote about what he called the film 's " disastrous " tone , saying that " despite the Rampage arcade cabinets being constantly visible in its villains ' headquarters , director Brad Peyton 's live - action adaptation comes off as too emotionally glib and mean - spirited , even for a mega - budget B - movie . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
!
scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Date ! scope="col " Category ! scope="col " Nominee(s ) ! scope="col " Result !
scope="col " ! scope="row " rowspan="3 " Teen Choice Awards
LAWSUIT
Section::::Lawsuit .
In late March 2018 , German director Uwe Boll threatened to file a lawsuit against Warner Bros. if the studio did not change the film 's title .
Boll , who produced and directed an unrelated Rampage film trilogy , claimed that the Warner Bros. film will " shrink " his brand and revenues he could use for future installments of his Rampage films .
He also went on to say that the Warner Bros. film " confuses the audience " and is " one of those typical feelgood , popcorn bullshit movies that the studios use to brainwash America even more ! "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS