BILLION
A billion is a number with two distinct definitions : * 1,000,000,000 , i.e. one thousand million , or ( ten to the ninth power ) , as defined on the short scale .
This is now the meaning in both British and American English .
*
Historically , in British English , 1,000,000,000,000 , i.e. one million million , or ( ten to the twelfth power ) , as defined on the long scale .
This is one thousand times larger than the short scale billion , and equivalent to the short scale trillion .
American English has always used the short scale definition but British English once employed both versions .
Historically , the United Kingdom used the long scale billion but since 1974 official UK statistics have used the short scale .
Since the 1950s the short scale has been increasingly used in technical writing and journalism , although the long scale definition still enjoys some limited usage .
Other countries use the word billion ( or words cognate to it ) to denote either the long scale or short scale billion .
For details , see Long and short scales – Current usage .
Another word for one thousand million is milliard , but this is used much less often in English than billion .
Some European languages such as Romanian , Finnish , Swedish , Danish , Portuguese , Spanish , Italian , Dutch , Hungarian , Norwegian , Polish , Czech , Slovak , Russian , French , Bulgarian and German , use milliard ( or a related word ) for the short scale billion , and billion ( or a related word ) is used for the long scale billion .
Thus for these languages billion is thousand times larger than the modern English billion .
However , in Russian , milliard ( миллиард ) is used for the short scale billion , and trillion ( триллион ) is used for the long scale billion .
HISTORY Section::::History .
According to the Oxford English Dictionary , the word billion was formed in the 16th century ( from million and the prefix bi- , " two " ) , meaning the second power of a million ( 1,000,000 = ) .
This long scale definition was similarly applied to trillion , quadrillion and so on .
The words were originally French , and entered English around the end of the 17th century .
Later , French arithmeticians changed the words ' meanings , adopting the short scale definition whereby three zeros rather than six were added at each step , so a billion came to denote a thousand million ( ) , a trillion ( ) , and so on .
This new convention was adopted in the United States in the 19th century , but Britain retained the original long scale use .
France , in turn , reverted to the long scale in 1948 .
In Britain , however , under the influence of American usage , the short scale came to be increasingly used .
In 1974 , Prime Minister Harold Wilson confirmed that the government would use the word billion only in its short scale meaning ( one thousand million ) .
In a written answer to Robin Maxwell - Hyslop MP , who asked whether official usage would conform to the traditional British meaning of a million million , Wilson stated : " No .
The word ' billion ' is now used internationally to mean 1,000 million and it would be confusing if British Ministers were to use it in any other sense .
I accept that it could still be interpreted in this country as 1 million million and I shall ask my colleagues to ensure that , if they do use it , there should be no ambiguity as to its meaning . "
SEE ALSO
* Names of large numbers REFERENCES