THE FRANKENSTEIN CHRONICLES
The Frankenstein Chronicles is a British television period crime drama series that first aired on ITV Encore on 11 November 2015 , designed as a re - imagining of Mary Shelley 's 1818 novel Frankenstein .
Lead actor Sean Bean also acted as an associate producer on the first series .
It follows Inspector John Marlott ( Sean Bean ) , a river police officer who uncovers a corpse made up of body parts from eight missing children and sets about to determine who is responsible .
The series co - stars Tom Ward as Home Secretary Sir Robert Peel and Anna Maxwell Martin as author Mary Shelley .
Other historical characters portrayed include William Blake ( first series ) and Ada Lovelace ( second series ) .
The first series consists of six episodes which opened to critical acclaim and drew an average 250,000 viewers per episode .
A&E subsequently acquired the series for broadcast in the United States , describing it as " thrilling and terrifying " .
On 20 June 2016 , ITV announced that it had renewed it for a second six - part series , with production set for January 2017 .
Filming commenced in March 2017 , with Laurence Fox and Maeve Dermody joining the cast .
The writing team for the second series consisted of Michael Robert Johnson , Paul Tomalin , Noel Farragher , Colin Carberry , and Glenn Patterson , with all six episodes directed by Alex Gabassi .
In December 2017 , it was announced that Netflix had struck a deal to carry the programme in the United States and other territories .
CAST * Sean Bean as Inspector John Marlott , a Thames River Police officer
* Tom Ward as Sir Robert Peel , the Home Secretary * Richie Campbell as Joseph Nightingale , a Bow Street Runner
* Ed Stoppard as Lord Daniel Hervey , an impoverished nobleman and proprietor of a private charity hospital * Vanessa Kirby as Lady Jemima Hervey , an impoverished noblewoman , sister to Lord Hervey * Ryan Sampson as Boz , a journalist from The Morning Chronicle
* Robbie Gee as Billy Oates , a hardened street - smart criminal * Anna Maxwell Martin as Mary Shelley , author of Frankenstein ( series 1 ) * Charlie Creed - Miles as Tom Pritty , a grave robber working for the local surgeons ( series 1 ) * Eloise Smyth as Flora , a homeless child taken by Billy Oates to work as a prostitute ( series 1 ) * Samuel West as Sir William Chester , a renowned surgeon and pioneer of galvanism ( series 1 ) * Mark Bazeley as Gernet Chester , Sir William 's cousin , also a surgeon ( series 1 )
* Elliot Cowan as Sir Bentley Warburton , Sir Robert Peel 's political rival ( series 1 )
* Kate Dickie as Mrs. Bishop , the matron of a gang of murderers ( series 1 ) * Steven Berkoff as William Blake , author , artist and printmaker ( series 1 ) * Deirdre Mullins as Agnes Marlott , John Marlott 's deceased wife ( series 1 ) * Laurence Fox as Frederick Dipple , a socialite with an interest in automata ( series 2 ) * Maeve Dermody as Esther Rose , a seamstress contracted by Dipple to provide clothing for his mechanical creations ( series 2 ) * Victoria Emslie as Automaton , one of Dipple 's mechanical creations ( series 2 ) * Lily Lesser as Ada Byron , a brilliant mathematician , and assistant to Dipple in creating his automata ( series 2 ) * Kerrie Hayes as Queenie Pickett , Dipple 's housemaid and Nightingale 's childhood friend ( series 2 ) EPISODES SERIES 1 ( 2015 ) SERIES 2 ( 2017 ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS