DYING LIGHT :
THE FOLLOWING
Dying Light : The Following is an expansion pack for the open - world first - person survival horror video game Dying Light .
The game was developed by Techland , published by
Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment , and released for Microsoft Windows , Linux , PlayStation 4 , and Xbox One on February 9 , 2016 .
The expansion adds characters , a story campaign , weapons , and gameplay mechanics .
Dying Light :
The Following – Enhanced Edition includes Dying Light , Dying Light :
The Following , and downloadable content released for the original game , except for three DLCs : Harran Ranger Bundle , Gun Psycho Bundle and Volatile Hunter Bundle .
GAMEPLAY Section::::Gameplay .
Set in a map that is twice as large as the two previous maps of Dying Light , The Following 's gameplay is similar to that of the main game where the infected are slow and fragile during daytime , and become aggressive and fast at night time .
Players can use parkour movements , such as climbing ledges , leaping , sliding , jumping and zip - lining , to move between places and kill enemies .
One of the new features introduced is a drivable dune buggy .
Players can use them to travel across the game 's world quickly and mow down enemies .
It has its own separate skill tree , and weapons , including spikes , flamethrowers , UV lights , electrical cages and other upgrades can be added to the buggy to increase its combat abilities .
The buggy 's performance and efficiency are affected by factors including the power of its suspension , engine , and brakes .
Players can also choose from 40 different paintjobs to customize their car , and must collect fuel in order to drive the buggy .
The game features several new weapons , such as a crossbow and a variety of new firearms such as submachine guns and revolvers .
A new " bounty " mode , which split missions into three different categories : " Basic " , " Dailies " , and " Community " , is introduced .
The missions and objectives included in this mode change every day , and players gain experience points by completing them .
The game also features a new difficulty mode named " Nightmare Mode " , which extends the duration of nighttime , and increases the strength and health of enemies .
Every action made in this mode drains stamina from the player 's character .
Players do not have to complete the base game before starting the expansion , however the character progression players earned in The Following will be carried to the base game .
Similar to the first game , the game supports a four - player cooperative multiplayer mode .
The asymmetrical multiplayer mode from the first game , Be The Zombie , also returns in The Following .
STORY Section::::Story .
Protagonist Kyle Crane learns from a survivor that cultist groups living outside the infected - filled quarantined city of Harran have successfully controlled the virus .
With the Tower running short on Antizin and Camden 's efforts to produce a cure still unsuccessful , Crane decides to go investigate this supposed immunity .
He heads out to the countryside , where he discovers that many of the survivors out there have converted to a religious cult called the Children of the Sun , who worship the Mother which is apparently the source of their immunity to the virus .
In order to earn the cult 's trust and learn more about the immunity , Crane decides to assist the survivors .
Eventually , one of the Faceless , the high - ranking members of the cult , approaches Crane and privately admits that their immunity is gained through a special elixir they had discovered , but like Antizin , it only suppresses the infection and does not fully cure it .
The Faceless also reveal that they are working on a permanent cure , and promise that in exchange for his help , they will give Crane the cure to take back to Harran .
Crane is then tasked with assisting a man named Atilla , who is working on an important project for the Mother .
Atilla tells Crane that the Children of the Sun believe in a prophecy where a chosen one would rise up to become the prophet of the God of the Sun and purify the infection .
He also reveals that the Mother was Jasmine , the wife of a local military Colonel who was involved in the experiments that caused the outbreak , but was bitten during the outbreak .
Before succumbing to the infection himself , the Colonel gave Atilla a secret code that Atilla passes on to Crane .
Attila then commits suicide in an attempt to invoke the prophecy , but it fails to occur .
Crane then discovers that the remnants of Rais ' gang have also traveled to the countryside to search for the supposed cure as well .
Rais ' thugs stage an attack on the Mother 's base in a nearby dam , but when Crane arrives , he finds both Rais ' bandits and the Faceless all dead .
Entering the dam , Crane discovers that the Mother has been turned into a sentient volatile .
She reveals that the dam was a secret military facility that held a special chemical substance .
However , rather than being a cure for the virus , the elixir instead slowly turns whoever uses it into a sentient volatile , like it did to the Mother .
During the day , she is able to retain her mental faculties and has been given telepathic abilities in order to communicate , but at night , she becomes an uncontrollable feral monster .
The Mother tells Crane that the only way to stop the infection is to summon the God of the Sun to purify the land , sacrificing everybody in Harran in the process .
At this point , Crane can choose to either listen to the Mother , or defy her .
If Crane chooses to defy the Mother , the Mother attacks , forces him to drink the elixir and attempts to kill him , but Crane eventually prevails and kills her .
Taking what 's left of the elixir , Crane leaves the dam , suffering continuous blackouts , and finds himself in a populated area seemingly outside the quarantine , but discovers that his exposure to the elixir has already turned him into a sentient volatile .
As night falls , the infected Crane lets out a feral scream as a nearby mother and her children watch in terror .
If Crane chooses to listen to the Mother , she leads him to a nuclear warhead that was originally meant to be a fail - safe to contain the outbreak .
Crane inputs the code Atilla had given him , which activates the warhead , presumably destroying all of Harran and killing all of the survivors and infected , taking the virus with them .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
The Following was developed by Techland and published by
Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment .
According to lead designer Maciej Binkowski , the team decided to implement a dune buggy into The Following as they felt that it was a " fantasy " of the zombie genre , and they missed the opportunity when developing the base game .
The process of implementing them was described as " hard " , as they must ensure that the new system must work functionally with other gameplay mechanics , most notably the parkour system .
The development team looked at players ' feedback and requests regarding the first Dying Light , and decided to add the most demanded features , including a new story and new firearms , to the game .
The new campaign lasts for at least ten hours , and centers around the theme " mystery " .
Gameplay elements from The Following were originally part of the core Dying Light game , but were later left behind as the core game was becoming too large for the team to handle .
According to Binkowski , the development of the game continued after the release of the first game , and numerous improvements were made to the parkour system , animation , artificial intelligence and graphics .
In May 2015 , it was announced that the development of another Techland video game , Hellraid , had been put on hold so as to allow the studio to allocate resources and time to concentrate on the development of the Dying Light franchise .
The game was teased by Techland on July 23 , 2015 , before being officially announced a week later .
To reflect the increased scope and scale of the expansion , Techland raised the game 's price on November 25 , 2015 .
Although the game can be bought separately , it was included in Dying Light : The Following – Enhanced Edition , which bundles The Following with the base game and its downloadable content , except for three DLCs : Harran Ranger Bundle , Gun Psycho Bundle and Volatile Hunter Bundle .
Players of the original game can upgrade to the Enhanced Edition for free .
The Following is also free for players who have purchased the base game 's Season Pass .
The Enhanced Edition were released on February 9 , 2016 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Dying Light :
The Following has received generally positive reviews from critics , scoring 78/100 on Metacritic , and 79.94 % on GameRankings .
Kevin Dunsmore of Hardcore Gamer gave the game a 4 out of 5 saying , " The Following expands Dying Light in a meaningful new way , giving fans something fun to salivate over . "
Scott Butterworth from GameSpot rated the game an 8/10 saying , " The Following evolves Dying Light 's formula by adding substantial new mechanics that compliment or even reframe familiar gameplay elements . "
The extension got to number 5 in the US downloads chart .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS