IRON AND STEEL INDUSTRY IN THE UNITED STATES
In 2014 , the United States was the world 's third - largest producer of raw steel ( after China and Japan ) , and the sixth - largest producer of pig iron .
The industry produced 29 million metric tons of pig iron and 88 million tons of steel .
Most iron and steel in the United States is now made from iron and steel scrap , rather than iron ore .
The United States is also a major importer of iron and steel , as well as iron and steel products .
Employment as of 2014 was 149,000 people employed in iron and steel mills , and 69,000 in foundries .
The value of iron and steel produced in 2014 was $ 113 billion .
As of 2015 , major steel - makers in the United States included : ArcelorMittal USA , AK Steel , Carpenter Technology , Commercial Metals Company , Nucor , Steel Dynamics , and U.S. Steel .
STEEL MILLS Section::::Steel mills .
There are two main types of steel mills .
The traditional large integrated steel mill , which reduces metallic iron from ore ( iron oxide ) and makes it into pig iron and steel , has been steadily declining in importance for decades in the US .
The second type , the mini - mill , or specialty steel mill , which produces new steel products by melting steel scrap , now produces the majority of steel in the US .
INTEGRATED STEEL
MILLS
Section::::Integrated steel mills .
In 2017 , there were 9 operating integrated steel mills in the United States ( plus one idled ) , down from 13 in 2000 .
Integrated mills produced 31 % of the steel produced in the US .
In an integrated steel mill , iron ore is reduced to metallic iron .
In the US , this is done in blast furnaces .
The direct - reduction method of producing iron from ore has not been used in the US since 2012 .
Some of the iron from the blast furnaces is converted to steel ; today this is done in basic oxygen furnaces .
Iron ore , coke , and flux are fed into the blast furnace and heated .
The coke reduces the iron oxide in the ore to metallic iron , and the molten mass separates into slag and iron .
Some of the iron from the blast furnace is cooled , and marketed as pig iron ; the rest flows into basic oxygen furnaces , where it is converted into steel .
Iron and steel scrap may be added to both the blast furnace and the basic iron furnace .
US Steel operates a number of integrated steel mills , including the Gary Works in Gary , Indiana .
They also operate the Edgar Thomson Works , which is the iron- and steel - making unit of the Mon Valley Works , which includes three other related plants .
The Company operates the Great Lakes Works , and Granite City Works .
ArcelorMittal operates three integrated steel mills : in East Chicago , Indiana , Burns Harbor , Indiana , and Cleveland , Ohio SPECIALTY STEEL MILLS / MINIMILLS RAW MATERIALS
IRON ORE IRON AND STEEL SCRAP Section::::Iron and steel scrap .
Two - thirds of the iron and steel produced in the US is made from recycled scrap , rather than from iron ore .
In 2014 , 81 million mt of iron and steel were produced from scrap .
Most steel from scrap is produced using electric arc furnaces .
COKE Section::::Coke .
Coke is used to reduce iron ore ( made up of iron oxides ) to metallic iron .
FLUX Section::::Flux .
Flux is added to the furnace charge ( iron ore , pig iron , or scrap ) to lower the melting point , and draw unwanted impurities into the slag .
The most common flux is lime .
Other fluxes include dolomite , soda ash , and fluorspar .
ALLOY METALS
Section::::Alloy metals .
Other metals are commonly added to steel to produce alloy steels of various types .
Common alloy metals are manganese , nickel , molybdenum , chromium , and vanadium .
Stainless steel commonly contains a minimum of 10.5 % chromium , and may also contain significant amounts of nickel or molybdenum .
SLAG Section::::Slag .
Slag , a byproduct of iron and steel - making composed primarily of highly impure glass , would normally be a waste product .
However , it is in demand as an aggregate in concrete , asphalt paving , and construction fill .
In 2014 , the industry produced and marketed about 16.0 mt of slag , worth an estimated $ 270 million .
INTERNATIONAL TRADE Section::::International trade .
The United States has been a major importer of steel and steel mill products since the 1960s .
In 2014 , the US exported 11 million tons of steel products , and imported 39 million tons .
Net imports were 17 percent of consumption .
+ Imports by Top 10 source countriesYTD through December 2017 !
No.!!Country ! !
Volume(metric tons ) ! !
Percent ! !
Value HISTORY OF US
IRON-
AND STEEL - MAKING Section::::History of US iron- and steel - making .
The US iron and steel industry has paralleled the industry in other countries in technological developments .
In the 1800s , the US switched from charcoal to coke in ore smelting , adopted the Bessemer process , and saw the rise of very large integrated steel mills .
In the 20th century , the US industry successively adopted the open hearth process , then the basic oxygen furnace .
Since the American industry peaked in the 1940s and 1950s , the US industry has shifted to small mini - mills and specialty mills , using iron and steel scrap as feedstock , rather than iron ore .
REFERENCES Section::::References .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* American Iron and Steel Institute