WITS ACADEMY WITS Academy is an American telenovela - formatted teen sitcom that aired on Nickelodeon from October 5 , 2015 to October 30 , 2015 .
The show , a spin - off / sequel to Every Witch Way , was announced on February 25 , 2015 , and was created by Catharina Ledeboer , produced by Viacom International and Cinemat Inc , executive produced by Tatiana Rodriguez and José V Scheuren .
Daniela Nieves , Julia Antonelli and Todd Allen Durkin reprise their roles as Andi , Jessie and Agamemnon .
On December 17 , 2015 , actor Todd Allen Durkin announced that he would be leaving the show , and on March 24 , 2016 , actress Daniela Nieves stated that the show was cancelled .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Andi ( Emma 's best friend ) is finally becoming a Guardian , as she is now training and studying at the WITS Academy , the Magic Realm 's most esteemed school for witches and wizards - in - training , or WITs .
As the best friend and unofficial Guardian to the Chosen One , she will have to work hard to prove that she can live up to expectations as the first and only human Guardian .
Andi is also in charge of getting two of the Academy 's toughest WITs to graduation day : Jessie , Jax 's little sister , and Ben , a young wizard - in - training .
Andi meets other Guardians - in - training , like Luke , Lily 's cousin , who becomes her love interest , Ruby , who becomes her rival , and Kim , who becomes her best friend .
Luke and Andi become a couple , while Ruby is expelled from the Academy .
The show left on a cliffhanger but was canceled , resulting in there not being a season 2 .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* Andi Cruz ( Daniela Nieves ) :
Emma 's best friend who studies and trains to be the first ever human Guardian at the WITS Academy .
Andi is outgoing and funny .
She has a secret crush on Luke , and they become a couple at the end of the season .
Her WITs are Jessie and Ben .
* Jessie Novoa ( Julia Antonelli ) : Jax 's little sister who asks a lot of questions and can be annoying sometimes .
She gained her powers in the series finale of Every Witch Way and attends the WITS Academy to learn how to use them .
She understands the Hexoren .
Jessie is Andi 's WIT .
* Ben Davis ( Jailen Bates ) : A very smart wizard .
He is good in theory , but not in practice , so his spells do not always succeed .
He does not have much confidence in himself .
Sometimes his lack of confidence is very funny .
Ben is Andi 's other WIT .
*
Ruby Webber ( Kennedy Lea Slocum ) : The main antagonist of the season .
She is the first powerless witch of her family , and because of this , she is insecure and a control freak .
She hates Andi and is always willing to get her into trouble .
Ruby takes the Dyad Tree 's magic sap because it gives her powers , but this is reported to Agamemnon , who expels Ruby at the end of the season .
Her WITs are Emily and Ethan .
* Emily Prescott ( Meg Crosbie ) : A young witch who is stubborn and determined to become stronger , due to her weak powers .
Emily is Ruby 's WIT in the season , although her new Guardian is unknown .
* Ethan Prescott ( Timothy Colombos )
: He has a natural talent for magic and likes working in a team .
He never questions orders , and does whatever someone tells him to , as he is very loyal .
Ethan is Ruby 's WIT in the season , although his new Guardian is unknown .
* Luke Archer ( Ryan Cargill ) :
Lily 's cousin , who belongs to a family of Guardians to Chosen Ones and wants to live up to expectations .
Honest and smart , he is very competitive .
He has a crush on Andi , and they become a couple at the end of the season .
His WITs are Sean and Gracie , whom he cares for very much .
* Gracie Walker ( Lidya Jewett ) : An exuberant young witch .
Gracie is Luke 's WIT .
She is also a very powerful witch , and because of this is very bossy and stubborn .
She is a little too powerful for a young witch .
She is the youngest witch at the academy .
Gracie looks up to Luke , she also cares for him , like Sean .
* Sean De Soto ( Andrew Ortega ) :
A carefree wizard who wants to have fun and make others smile .
Sean is Luke 's other WIT .
He looks up to Luke , and cares for him , like Gracie .
* Cameron Masters ( Tyler Perez )
: Although easily fooled , he is the best student of the WITS Academy ; he is the student prefect and assistant to Agamemnon .
He has a crush on Ruby , and obeys her to make her happy .
* Kim Sanders ( Jazzy Williams ) : A whip - smart inventor who is extremely intelligent , quick - witted and always willing to lend a hand ; she is easily the smartest student in the Academy .
She becomes Andi 's roommate in the second episode and immediately befriends her .
Her WITs are Harris and Sienna .
* Agamemnon ( Todd Allen Durkin ) : The current headmaster of the WITS Academy .
He was the leader of the Witches ' Council , but he temporarily leaves the Council to focus on his new job , where Desdemona replaces him while he is away .
Although interested in his job , he is n't always fond of the WITS or Guardians - in - training , like Andi .
RECURRING
* Harris ( Peter Dager ) : Kim 's WIT , alongside Sienna .
* Sienna ( Erin Whitaker ) : Kim 's other WIT , alongside Harris .
*
Amelia Foiler ( Andrea Canny ) :
The Guardian that is a nightmare .
She becomes the Academy 's new coach in the seventh episode .
She does n't like Andi and tries her best to make her lose .
She is revealed to be a fugitive that Leopald Archer was after .
During the thirteenth episode , she is captured by Leo and Andi , loses her powers to Agamemnon , and is sent to Limbo .
* Leopald Archer ( Michael St. Pierre ) :
Luke 's uncle and a warrior from the Bad Realm .
He comes to the Academy in the eleventh episode to find a fugitive , who is eventually revealed to be Miss Foiler .
In the thirteenth episode , he captures her with Andi 's help , then leaves , going back into the bad realm to stop the witches ' bottles from happening to other wizards and witches again .
He gets on with Andi quite well .
*
The Hexoren ( no voice ) : A sentient book of spells , nicknamed " Hex " .
He can fly , open to a specific page on command , and somewhat communicate .
Hex is first of the mother of Emma , but since she is dead Emma has the book .
Hex is best friends with Andi , although he belongs to Emma .
In the series finale of Every Witch Way , Emma gives Andi the book to take with her to the WITs Academy , and there the friendship is continued .
EPISODES BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
WITS Academy premiered on Nickelodeon in the UK and Ireland on January 5 , 2016 .
It premiered on TeenNick in the U.S. on February 21 , 2016 .
It premiered on Nickelodeon in the Netherlands and Belgium on February 29 , 2016 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS