WYNONNA EARP ( TV SERIES )
Wynonna Earp ( ) is a supernatural Western horror television series .
Developed by Emily Andras , the Canadian - American production is based on the comic book series by Beau Smith .
Melanie Scrofano plays the series ' titular character .
Wynonna Earp premiered in the United States on Syfy on April 1 , 2016 .
The series premiered in Canada on CHCH - DT on April 4 .
On July 23 , 2016 , the renewal for a second season was announced at the Wynonna Earp panel at San Diego Comic - Con ( SDCC ) .
Originally slated for ten episodes , the season was increased to 12 episodes in October 2016 .
In Canada , Wynonna Earp moved from CHCH - DT to Space effective April 15 , 2017 .
In anticipation of the premiere of Season 2 , Space began airing Season 1 on the same date with a special double - episode series debut .
Season 2 premiered simultaneously on Syfy and Space on June 9 , 2017 .
On July 22 , 2017 , David Ozer , president of IDW Entertainment , announced at the show 's SDCC panel that the series had been renewed for a third season with the premiere scheduled for 2018 .
Space announced on the same day that it had ordered 12 episodes for a third season , together with Syfy .
Andras credited Wynonna Earp 's passionate fan base ( nicknamed " Earpers " ) with gaining the renewal .
Season 3 debuted with a special preview on July 16 , before its official premiere on Syfy and Space on July 20 , 2018 .
On July 21 , 2018 , the renewal by Syfy and Space for a fourth season was announced at SDCC .
The season will comprise 12 episodes and is scheduled to premiere in 2019 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Wynonna Earp , the great - great - granddaughter of legendary lawman Wyatt Earp , battles revenants , the reincarnated outlaws that Wyatt killed .
She also fights other supernatural beings that inhabit the Ghost River Triangle , a cursed territory near the Canadian Rockies that includes Purgatory , her home town .
Upon her 27th birthday , Wynonna inherited the special power to return revenants to Hell with her ancestor 's 16-inch barrel special " Peacemaker " revolver .
She is recruited by the Black Badge Division ( BBD ) , a secret government agency led by Special Agent Xavier Dolls which eventually includes an ageless Doc Holliday and Wynonna 's sister , Waverly Earp .
Nicole Haught , Waverly 's girlfriend and a Purgatory Sheriff 's Deputy , assists the team in her local police role .
The first season centers on Wynonna fighting the revenants who kidnapped her older sister Willa from their homestead when they were girls , and the threat posed by Bobo Del Rey , leader of the local revenants .
In the second season Wynonna discovers she is pregnant , while Waverly struggles with possession by a demon and doubts about her lineage .
At the same time , two sister - wife widows of the dead sheriff who cursed Wyatt Earp seek to resurrect him .
EPISODES
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* Melanie Scrofano as Wynonna Earp , a great - great - granddaughter of Wyatt Earp , who wields the power of Wyatt 's " Peacemaker " handgun .
She gives birth to a daughter in the season 2 finale , who is smuggled out of the Ghost River Triangle .
* Shamier Anderson as Deputy Marshal Xavier Dolls , a special agent with the Black Badge division of the United States Marshals Service , a combustible mutant lizard - man generated by Black Badge .
He is killed in season 3 by a revenant .
( seasons 1–3 )
* Tim Rozon as Doc Holliday , Wyatt Earp 's famed partner , cursed by the Stone Witch who cured his tuberculosis by way of eternal health .
He is turned into a vampire in season 3 .
* Dominique Provost - Chalkley as Waverly Earp , Wynonna 's younger half - sister , who was fathered by an angel named Julian .
She is an expert on Earp and ancient history , and becomes Nicole 's girlfriend .
* Katherine Barrell as Officer Nicole Haught , a deputy sheriff of Purgatory who becomes Waverly 's girlfriend and collaborates with Black Badge .
She is promoted to sheriff in season 3 .
( main season 3 ; recurring seasons 1–3 ) RECURRING * Greg Lawson as Sheriff Randy Nedley , the sheriff of Purgatory who is aware of the town 's supernatural nature .
He retires in season 3 and is succeeded by Nicole Haught .
( First appearance : " Purgatory " )
* Michael Eklund as Bobo Del Rey ( né Robert Svane ) , leader of the revenants and former friend of Wyatt Earp .
Before dying , he became Waverly 's sworn protector .
Bobo is executed by Wynonna in the season 1 finale but unexpectedly revived in season 2 .
Somewhat of an enigma , Bobo is finally killed by Waverly .
( First appearance : " Keep the Home Fires Burning " ; seasons 1–3 ) * Rayisa Kondracki as Constance Clootie , also known as the Stone Witch .
One of Bulshar 's three wives .
( First appearance :
" Diggin ' Up Bones " ; season 1 ) * Kate Drummond as Agent Lucado , Dolls ' superior officer at Black Badge .
Killed by a demon .
( First appearance : " Walking After Midnight " ; seasons 1–2 ) * Natalie Krill as Willa Earp ( first known by the name Eve ) , Wynonna and Waverly 's older sister , also able to wield the power of Wyatt 's " Peacemaker " .
Mercy - killed by Wynonna in the Season 1 finale .
( First appearance :
" She Would n't Be Gone " ; season 1 )
* Shaun Johnston as Juan Carlo , Purgatory 's parish priest in the 1880s .
He is mercy - killed by Dolls in season 2 after being fatally wounded by The Widows .
In season 3 he is revealed to have been an angel and , along with Julian , charged with protecting the entrance to the Garden of Eden in the Ghost River Triangle .
( First appearance : " Landslide " ; seasons 1–3 ) * Varun Saranga as Jeremy Chetri , a Black Badge Division scientist who helps the Earps against their BBD blood contract .
When he was young , he was trapped in a car for three days with his dead mother , and can sense when his friends are scared .
In season 3 , a fire witch detected that Jeremy was not completely human .
( First appearance : " Steel Bars and Stone Walls " ; season 2–present )
* Tamara Duarte as Rosita Bustillos , a revenant and Doc 's girlfriend with advanced degrees in biochemistry and engineering whom he recruits to assist the team .
She betrays them and flees in the season 2 finale .
( First appearance : " Shed Your Skin " ; season 2 )
*
Dani Kind as Mercedes Gardner , Wynonna 's rich high - school best friend , head of the Gardner Family and its purse strings , but disliked by her siblings Beth and Tucker .
Along with her sister Beth , her face is stolen by demonic widow spiders ( The Widows ) , leaving human Mercedes comatose .
The possessing Widow is executed by Wynonna in the season 2 finale .
Mercedes is revived but left with a scarred face , which was suddenly healed after Waverly touched her cheek , not knowing that she had demi - angel powers .
( First appearance : " Shed Your Skin " ; seasons 2–3 )
* Caleb Ellsworth - Clark as Tucker Gardner , younger brother of the Gardner sisters and local miscreant , who has an unhealthy obsession with Waverly .
He is killed by the Widow possessing Beth Gardner .
( First appearance : "
Gon na Getcha Good " ; season 2 )
* Meghan Heffern as Beth Gardner , the younger of the two Gardner sisters .
Along with her sister Mercedes , her face is stolen by demonic widow spiders ( The Widows ) , killing human Beth .
Widow Beth is executed by Wynonna in the season 2 finale .
( First appearance : "
Gon na Getcha Good " ; season 2 )
* Megan Follows as Michelle Gibson Earp , mother of the Earp sisters .
Michelle is a voluntary patient in the Ghost River Institute , a high - security psychiatric facility .
( First appearance : " Blood Red And Going Down " ; season 3 )
* Chantel Riley as Kate ( Katalin ) aka " Contessa " , wife of Doc Holliday since the 1880s .
Kate was turned into a vampire after Doc 's disappearance , and returned to Purgatory when she found out he was alive .
( First appearance : " Blood Red And Going Down " ; season 3 )
* Jean Marchand as Bulshar Clootie , sheriff of Purgatory when Wyatt Earp was the federal marshall in the territory .
He was entombed by Juan Carlo and Robert Svane ( Bobo ) , and resuscitated by The Widows .
An Earp family adversary , Bulshar is revealed to be the embodiment of the serpent from the Garden of Eden and aims to bring on an apocalypse during Wynonna 's time .
( First appearance : " Blood Red And Going Down " ; season 3 ) * Sebastian Pigott as Charlie / Julian .
An angel assigned to protect the Garden of Eden together with Juan Carlo .
He fathered Waverly during his love affair with Michelle Gibson Earp .
( First appearance : " If We Make It Through December " ; season 3 ) Section::::Cast and characters .
Section::::Recurring .
Episodes of season 1 featured Dylan Koroll as Champ Hardy , Waverly 's boyfriend before she met Officer Nicole Haught ;
Natascha Girgis as Gus McCready , aunt of the Earp girls ; and David LeReaney as Judge Cryderman , an antagonist of Wynonna Earp .
In Season 1 Rachael Ancheril appeared as Mattie Perley , a witch known as The Blacksmith , who provided assistance to the Earps ; in Season 2 Ancheril appeared as Gretta Perley , also known as The Iron Witch , who was seeking revenge against the Earps whom she blames for the death of her twin sister Mattie .
DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION Section::::Development and production .
Syfy acquired the U.S. rights to Wynonna Earp from SEVEN24 Films and IDW Entertainment in July 2015 and placed an order for 13 episodes .
International distribution of the series was acquired by Dynamic Television in September 2015 .
On September 30 , 2015 , SEVEN24 Films announced the acquisition of Canadian broadcast rights by over - the - air independent station CHCH - DT .
Melanie Scrofano was cast in the title role , with Tim Rozon as Doc Holliday and Shamier Anderson as Agent Dolls .
Dominique Provost - Chalkley was cast as Waverly Earp .
In recurring roles , Michael Eklund was cast as villain Bobo Del Rey and Katherine Barrell as Officer Nicole Haught .
" Tell That Devil " by singer - songwriter Jill Andrews was selected as the theme music for the series .
The titles of Wynonna Earp episodes are based on country and western songs .
Viacom International Media Networks acquired the rights to broadcast Wynonna Earp on its multinational Spike channels in July 2016 .
In March 2017 , Bell Media announced the new partnership between Space and SEVEN24 Films as Canadian co - producers of the series .
SEASON 1
Section::::Season 1 .
Filming of Season 1 took place from September 14 , 2015 , to February 12 , 2016 , in Calgary , Alberta , Canada .
Locations included Bridgeland , Inglewood , and Heritage Park .
Didsbury , Alberta , was used as the setting for the series ' small town of Purgatory .
Syfy released the first promotional images and synopsis for the series on November 6 , 2015 .
The teaser trailer was released through IGN in January 2016 .
Wynonna Earp premiered on April 1 , 2016 , on Syfy ; and on April 4 , 2016 , on CHCH - DT .
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
After the series was renewed for a second season , Melanie Scrofano found out that she was pregnant .
Emily Andras decided to incorporate her pregnancy in the arc of the titular character , she informed IDW Entertainment of the prospective storyline , and Syfy added two more episodes , increasing Season 2 from 10 to 12 episodes .
Season 2 began filming in Calgary and surrounding areas from December 12 , 2016 , to April 13 , 2017 .
Additional location shooting took place in Springbank , Alberta .
The recurring cast was joined by Varun Saranga in the role of Jeremy Chetri and Tamara Duarte as Rosita .
The ' sneak peek ' of the teaser trailer for the new season was released on April 1 , 2017 , and the trailer released officially by IGN on May 19 , 2017 .
Syfy released the poster for the season on May 24 , 2017 .
Season 2 premiered on June 9 , 2017 , on Syfy and Space .
SEASON 3
Section::::Season 3 .
Filming of Season 3 began January 15 , 2018 , and wrapped on May 7 , 2018 .
On February 5 , 2018 , the series announced the casting of Megan Follows in the role of Michelle Earp , the mother of Wynonna Earp .
In March 2018 , Syfy and Space announced that Zoie Palmer had joined the series as a guest star in the role of Jolene ; followed by the announcement that Chantel Riley had been cast in the recurring role of a bounty hunter character named Kate .
Bell Media announced on April 24 that musician Jann Arden had joined the cast as Bunny Loblaw , a member of Purgatory 's town council .
The key art for the season was released on June 5 , 2018 , along with photos of the cast .
Syfy 's trailer for the third season was released on June 8 , 2018 .
Space released its trailer on June 15 , 2018 .
The episode titles were released on June 19 , 2018 .
Season 3 premiered on July 20 , 2018 , on Syfy and Space .
The first episode of the season was released as a special broadcast by Syfy on July 16 , 2018 , at 11 p.m. Eastern , in advance of the season premiere .
RELEASE
BROADCAST Section::::Release .
Section::::Broadcast .
Wynonna Earp premiered in the United Kingdom on Spike on July 29 , 2016 , at 9:00 p.m.
The series premiered in Australia on Spike on February 5 , 2017 .
In the UK , Season 2 premiered on Spike on June 13 , 2017 , at 10:00 p.m. Season 3 premiered on 5Spike on July 27 , 2018 , at 10:00 p.m.
The series is distributed internationally on Netflix .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Wynonna Earp became available on Amazon Video as video on demand on May 6 , 2016 .
In December 2016 , SEVEN24 Films producer Jordy Randall announced in an interview with the Calgary Herald that Season 1 would be streaming on Netflix .
The series became available on Netflix in the United States on April 1 , 2017 ; and in Canada on April 5 , 2017 .
The Season 1 DVD for Region 4 and Blu - ray for Region B were released first in Australia by Roadshow Entertainment on May 3 , 2017 .
The Season 2 DVD was released in Region 4 and the Blu - ray in Region B by Roadshow Entertainment on November 1 , 2017 .
A crowdfunding campaign for a region free Blu - ray release was launched on May 23 , 2017 , by IDW Entertainment on Indiegogo .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
In the United States , Season 1 averaged a total rating of 0.13 with 0.56 million viewers .
The season received an 85 % approval rating on review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes with an average rating of 6.11/10 .
Metacritic gave it an average score of 68 out of 100 .
Season 2 averaged a 0.12 rating in the U.S. with 0.50 million viewers .
Viewership among women aged 18–34 increased 44 percent , representing more than half of Wynonna Earps audience .
The season received a 100 % approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes with an average rating of 8.33/10 .
In Canada , overall viewership increased 52 % on Space compared to Season 1 on CHCH - DT .
Viewership of Season 2 increased 30 % compared to the first season , and made Space " the most - watched entertainment specialty channel " during the program 's time slot .
In its new series review , Collider gave Wynonna Earp four stars , calling it " a fresh and familiar take on zombies , the Wild West , and gunslinger culture " and " something that also feels different to anything we 're seeing on TV currently , thanks not only to its setting , but its prominent placement of so many strong , profane , kickass female characters .
"
Digital Journal said the series was " smart " and " complex " with " a lot going for it " .
The A.V. Club called Melanie Scrofano " the right woman for the job ...
an easy , authoritative presence " ; and " when it 's allowed the room to run , Wynonna Earp delights in itself , " adding that the series " could grow into the good - time Western pulp it has the potential to be . "
In a post - Season 1 review for Salon , Melanie McFarland wrote : " This modern Western proved its mettle by dint of unexpectedly weird plotting and witty dialogue ...
[ Melanie ]
Scrofano lends a hardened and slightly feral swagger to Wynonna that 's vastly entertaining ...
Much of the show 's winning spirit rests in its exploration of family loyalty and the popular conviction that one 's blood and dynastic ties compel one to fulfill a prescribed destiny . "
E !
Entertainment Television named Wynonna Earp the " Best New Show " of 2016 .
It was chosen by Variety as one of the 20 best new series of 2016 , stating " what this prairie - set Canadian import lacks in budget , it makes up for in gumption , sass and camaraderie .
" In its annual " Best of TV " highlight , Collider named Wynonna Earp the " Best New Sci - Fi " show of 2016 .
Maureen Ryan of Variety named Wynonna Earp one of the best television shows of 2017 , praising its " fierce and committed performances " .
The New York Times recommended Wynonna Earp as one of the television series to stream on Netflix , describing it as " internal mythology [ that ] can be a little too involved , but the characters ' motivations are always clear , and the snarky dialogue is fun " .
" Wayhaught " , the portmanteau for the relationship between Waverly Earp and Nicole Haught , was considered one of the favorite 2017 fan " ships " on Tumblr , and the series was praised for how it is portrayed and acknowledged by Dominique Provost - Chalkley and Katherine Barrell .
Wynonna Earps fan base is credited with increasing the series ' presence on social media and benefitting Syfy 's " It 's a Fan Thing " marketing campaign for niche audiences .
MEDIA INFORMATION
Section::::Media information .
Wynonna Earp producers and cast members appeared at the Calgary International Film Festival on September 30 , 2017 , in a special program showcasing film and television productions in Alberta , Canada .
The event was live - streamed and featured behind - the - scenes stories , insights , and a Q&A session .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS AURORA AWARDS Section::::Awards and nominations .
Section::::Aurora Awards . !
Year ! !
Category ! !
Nominee ! !
Result ! !
Ref CANADIAN SCREEN AWARDS Section::::Canadian Screen Awards . ! Year ! !
Category ! !
Nominee ! !
Result ! !
Ref DRAGON AWARDS Section::::Dragon Awards . !
Year ! !
Category ! !
Nominee ! !
Result ! !
Ref GLAAD MEDIA AWARD Section::::GLAAD Media Award . !
Year ! !
Category ! !
Nominee ! !
Result ! !
Ref PEOPLE 'S CHOICE AWARDS
Section::::People 's Choice Awards . !
Year ! !
Category ! !
Nominee ! !
Result ! !
Ref ROCKIE AWARDS Section::::Rockie Awards . !
Year ! !
Category ! !
Nominee ! !
Result ! !
Ref ROSIE
AWARDS Section::::Rosie Awards . !
Year ! !
Category ! !
Nominee ! !
Result ! !
Ref WGC SCREENWRITING
AWARDS
Section::::WGC Screenwriting Awards .
!
Year ! !
Category ! !
Nominee ! !
Result ! !
Ref CONTESTS E ! ONLINE Section::::Contests .
Section::::E !
Online . !
Year ! !
Category ! !
Nominee ! !
Result ! !
Ref SEE ALSO * Ghost Town
* Jonah Hex
* List of dramatic television series with LGBT characters
* List of English - language Canadian television series
* List of fantasy television programs
* List of LGBT characters in television and radio * List of science fiction TV and radio shows produced in Canada *
Weird West
NOTES REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
Podcast
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Wynonna Earp at Space
* Wynonna Earp at CHCH - DT
( 2016 archive )
* Wynonna Earp at CHCH - DT ( 2017 archive )
* Wynonna Earp at SEVEN24
Films
* Wynonna Earp at IDW Entertainment * Wynonna Earp Character Guide at Syfy
* Wynonna Earp Purgatory Case Files at Syfy
* Wynonna Earp - Comic Creator Beau Smith .
GeekWorldRadio interview , YouTube