GAME SHAKERS Game Shakers is an American comedy television series created by Dan Schneider that premiered on Nickelodeon on September 12 , 2015 .
The series stars Cree Cicchino , Madisyn Shipman ,
Benjamin " Lil ' P - Nut " Flores , Jr. , Thomas Kuc , and Kel Mitchell .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The series revolves around two seventh graders , Babe and Kenzie , living in Brooklyn , New York , who create a video game app called " Sky Whale " for their school science project .
When the game proves to be wildly successful , they form a gaming company called Game Shakers , and hire their friend , Hudson .
They later partner with rapper Double G , who becomes their investor as part of a compromise for their illegal use of his song , " Drop Dat
What " , in their game .
Double G 's son , Triple G , then becomes a video game consultant for the company , making him the fourth Game Shaker .
EPISODES
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN * Cree Cicchino as Babe Carano , creator of Game Shakers at 12-years - old .
She always does her own thing and does n't mind stepping on someone 's toes to do so .
She is confident , quick - witted , and fearless when it comes to making tough decisions .
* Madisyn Shipman as Kenzie Bell , creator of Game Shakers at 12-years - old .
She lacks a social filter and tends to be extremely blunt , but makes up for her lackluster social skills with incredible tech knowledge .
* Benjamin " Lil ' P - Nut " Flores , Jr. as Triple G , the son of Double G who had a lavish childhood , but all that he really wants is to be with children his own age .
He 's eventually hired by Babe and Kenzie as the video game consultant .
In " Shark Explosion " , it is revealed that his real name is Grover .
* Thomas Kuc as Hudson , a friend of Babe and Kenzie as well as a member of Game Shakers .
Despite knowing that Hudson is n't necessarily intelligent , Babe states in " Sky Whale " that he 's cute and will do whatever she and Kenzie say .
* Kel Mitchell as Double G , a successful rapper and billionaire whose real name is Gale J. Griffin .
He is impulsive , unpredictable , and determined to have as much fun and money as possible .
With the help of Babe and Kenzie , he rediscovers his love for gaming , and becomes the main investor of Game Shakers .
In " Revenge at Tech Fest " , Double G gets a temporary trionic right arm after his right arm is badly broken following a slingslot incident caused by MeGo .
RECURRING
* Shel Bailey as Ruthless , Double G 's tall assistant who speaks extremely loudly .
* Bubba Ganter as Bunny , Double G 's childish assistant .
* Regi Davis as Mr. Sammich , Babe , Kenzie , and Hudson 's science teacher at Sugar Hill Junior High School .
While he is often annoyed when Double G crashes his classes to scold Babe and Kenzie on something they did wrong , Mr. Sammich tends to cower when Ruthless and Bunny are with him .
* Tanner Buchanan as Mason Kendall , an older boy whom Babe has a crush on .
In " The Mason Experience " , Mason moves away to Florida .
* Todd Bosley as Teague , a waiter at Fooders .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
When ordered to series in early 2015 , it was planned that the first season would consist of 26 episodes .
The cast of the series was announced on July 7 , 2015 .
On July 25 , 2015 , the network announced some special guest stars , including Matt Bennett , Yvette Nicole Brown , GloZell , Jared " ProJared " Knabenbauer , and Smosh Games host David " Lasercorn " Moss .
On March 2 , 2016 , Nickelodeon announced that the series had been renewed for a second season .
The second season premiered on Nickelodeon on September 17 , 2016 .
Nickelodeon renewed Game Shakers for a third season on November 16 , 2016 .
The third season premiered on Nickelodeon on February 10 , 2018 .
On March 26 , 2018 , Nickelodeon announced that Game Shakers had been canceled and will end after its third season .
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
The series premiered on YTV in Canada on October 6 , 2015 , and debuted on Nickelodeon channels in the United Kingdom and Ireland on November 2 , 2015 , and in Australia and New Zealand on February 8 , 2016 .
RECEPTION RATINGS NOMINATIONS Section::::Reception . Section::::Nominations . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Result !
Ref .
VIDEO GAMES Section::::Video games .
Over the course of the series , a number of games designed by the characters have been shown on Game Shakers .
These games have been released online and through the Nick app .
Several of the games share titles with episodes of the series ( e.g. " Sky Whale " , " Dirty Blob " , " Tiny Pickles " , " Nasty Goats " , and " Llama Llama Spit Spit " ) .
The following is the list of games that have been released : * Sky Whale * Dirty Blob
* Tiny Pickles * Punchy Face
* Pop Star Surgeon
* Scubaroo * Nasty Goats
*
Pick It , Scratch It , Pop It
* Octopie * Psycho Beach Mummies * Ballarina * Llama Llama Spit Spit
* Crime Warp ( with Henry Danger ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS