ADVENTURE TIME
( SEASON 8)
The eighth season of Adventure Time , an American animated television series created by Pendleton Ward , premiered on Cartoon Network on March 26 , 2016 , and concluded on February 2 , 2017 .
The season was produced by Cartoon Network Studios and Frederator Studios .
It follows the adventures of Finn , a human boy , and his best friend and adoptive brother Jake , a dog with magical powers to change shape and size at will .
Finn and Jake live in the post - apocalyptic Land of Ooo , where they interact with the other main characters of the show : Princess Bubblegum , The Ice King , Marceline the Vampire Queen , Lumpy Space Princess , BMO , and Flame Princess .
Tom Herpich , Steve Wolfhard , Jesse Moynihan , Laura Knetzger , Kris Mukai , Emily Partridge , Graham Falk , Charmaine Verhagen , Sam Alden , Pendleton Ward , Seo Kim , Somvilay Xayaphone , Hanna K. Nyström , Ako Castuera , Aleks Sennwald , Polly Guo , Kent Osborne , and Adam Muto storyboarded and wrote the season .
The miniseries Islands , which follows Finn , Jake , BMO ( voiced by Niki Yang ) , and Susan Strong ( voiced by Jackie Buscarino ) as they leave Ooo and travel across the ocean to solve the mystery of Finn 's past , aired during this season .
It also features guest animators Alex and Lindsay Small - Butera ( who worked on " Beyond the Grotto " ) and James Baxter ( who worked on " Horse and Ball " ) .
The season debuted with the episode
" Broke His Crown " , which was watched by 1.13 million viewers marking a slight decrease from the previous season finale , " The Thin Yellow Line " , which was seen by 1.15 million viewers .
"
Islands Part 8 :
The Light Cloud , " the eighth - season finale , was watched by 1 million viewers , making it the lowest - rated Adventure Time season finale at the time .
Critical reception to the season was mostly positive , with The A.V. Club writer Oliver Sava expressing pleasant bemusement that the show 's quality had not suffered despite this season being its eighth .
Critics were also complimentary towards the Islands miniseries :
In April 2017 , Common Sense Media awarded the miniseries " The Common Sense Seal " , and at the 69th Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards in 2017 , the Islands episode " Imaginary Resources " won a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Animation .
Several compilation DVDs that contain episodes from the season have been released , and a set containing the entire season was released on September 4 , 2018 .
DEVELOPMENT CONCEPT Section::::Development .
Section::::Concept .
The series follows the adventures of Finn the Human , a human boy , and his best friend Jake , a dog with magical powers to change shape , grow , and shrink at will .
Finn and Jake live in the post - apocalyptic Land of Ooo , where they interact with the other major characters , including : Princess Bubblegum , The Ice King , Marceline the Vampire Queen , Lumpy Space Princess , BMO , and Flame Princess .
Common storylines revolve around Finn and Jake discovering strange creatures , dealing with the antagonistic , but misunderstood , Ice King , and battling monsters in order to help others .
Multi - episode story arcs for this season include the introduction of the character Fern , and Finn meeting his mother and learning about what became of humanity .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On July 7 , 2015 , The Hollywood Reporter announced that the series had been renewed for an eighth season .
The season 's storyline writers included Jack Pendarvis , Adam Muto , Kent Osborne , and Ashly Burch .
Originally , the show 's seventh season was supposed to comprise the episodes " Bonnie & Neddy " through " Reboot " , and its eighth season was supposed to include the episodes " Two Swords " through " Three Buckets " , but when it came time to upload the seventh season onto streaming sites , Cartoon Network chose to end the season with its 26th episode , " The Thin Yellow Line .
" Consequently , the episodes " Broke His Crown " through " Reboot " ( which had originally been ordered as the last episodes of the show 's seventh season ) and the episodes " Two Swords " through the Islands miniseries ( which had originally been ordered as the beginning of the show 's eighth season ) were combined to form the show 's official eighth season .
This new episode count was cemented by the release of the complete seventh season DVD on July 18 , 2017 , which included episodes up until " The Thin Yellow Line " , as well as the release of the complete eighth season on the Cartoon Network website .
This season 's episodes were produced in a process similar to those of the previous seasons .
Each episode was outlined in two - to - three pages that contained the necessary plot information .
These outlines were then handed to storyboard artists , who created full storyboards .
Design and coloring were done in Burbank , California , and animation was handled overseas in South Korea by Rough Draft Korea and Saerom Animation .
Continuing a tradition that started with the fifth season episode " A Glitch is a Glitch " , this season also features the work of guest animators .
" Beyond the Grotto " features 7 minutes of animation courtesy of Alex and Lindsay Small - Butera , a husband and wife duo known for their web series Baman Piderman , and the episode " Horse and Ball " features animation courtesy of James Baxter .
He had previously provided guest animation for the fifth - season episode " James Baxter the Horse " .
In both episodes , James Baxter the animator lends his voice to the equine character of the same name .
Storyboard artists who worked on this season include : Tom Herpich , Steve Wolfhard , Jesse Moynihan , Laura Knetzger , Kris Mukai , Emily Partridge , Graham Falk , Charmaine Verhagen , Sam Alden , Pendleton Ward , Seo Kim , Somvilay Xayaphone , Hanna K. Nyström , Ako Castuera , Aleks Sennwald , Polly Guo , Kent Osborne , and Adam Muto .
This was the final season to feature several long - serving storyboard artists and production crew members .
Moynihan left the show after completing " Normal Man " to finish his web comic Forming .
Finally , supervising director Andres Salaff left after this season to storyboard on Cartoon Network 's series Uncle Grandpa .
Conversely , the season also saw the return of former storyboard artist Ako Castuera ( who returned to storyboard the episode " Broke His Crown " with Nyström before working as a storyboard revisionist , starting with " Two Swords " ) .
and former storyboard artist and creative director Cole Sanchez ( who took the position of one of the series ' supervising directors starting with " Two Swords " ) . MINISERIES Section::::Miniseries .
During the eighth season of Adventure Time , the miniseries Islands aired at the end of January and the beginning of February 2017 .
This event was first hinted at before the airing of the first Adventure Time miniseries Stakes ( 2015 ) when head story writer Kent Osborne revealed that the show would likely produce several more miniseries .
Islands tells the story of Finn , Jake , BMO ( voiced by Niki Yang ) and Susan Strong ( voiced by Jackie Buscarino ) leaving Ooo and traveling across the ocean to solve the mystery of Finn 's past .
During their trip , they encounter various creatures , new friends , and a variety of mysterious islands .
The voyage culminates with a trip to Founder 's Island , where Finn learns what happened to the rest of the human race and meets his mother , Minerva ( voiced by Sharon Horgan ) .
CAST Section::::Cast .
The season 's voice actors include : Jeremy Shada ( Finn the Human ) , John DiMaggio ( Jake the Dog ) , Tom Kenny ( The Ice King ) , Hynden Walch ( Princess Bubblegum ) , and Olivia Olson ( Marceline the Vampire Queen ) .
Ward himself provides the voice for several minor characters , including Lumpy Space Princess .
Former storyboard artist Niki Yang voices the sentient video game console BMO in English , as well as Jake 's girlfriend Lady Rainicorn in Korean .
Polly Lou Livingston , a friend of Pendleton Ward 's mother , Bettie Ward , plays the voice of the small elephant Tree Trunks .
Jessica DiCicco voices Flame Princess , Finn 's ex - girlfriend and the sovereign of the Fire Kingdom .
Andy Milonakis voices N.E.P.T.R. , a sentient robot who makes and throws pies .
Justin Roiland provides the voice of the Earl of Lemongrab .
Several episodes , including most of the episodes in the Islands miniseries , feature Jackie Buscarino , who voices Susan Strong .
The Adventure Time cast records their lines together as opposed to doing it individually .
This is to capture more natural sounding dialogue among the characters .
Hynden Walch has described these group session as akin to " doing a play reading — a really , really out there play . "
In addition to the regular cast members , episodes feature guest voices from a range of professions , including actors , musicians , and artists .
In the season opener " Broke His Crown " , both Lena Dunham and Pamela Adlon reprise their characters Betty and Gunter the dinosaur .
Dan Mintz , Henry Rollins , and Laura Silverman return to reprise their roles as T.V. , Bob , and Ethel in " Lady Rainicorn of the Crystal Dimension " .
This episode also features former storyboard artist Bert Youn and comedian Fred Stoller voicing the rainicorns Lee and Roy .
The episode " I Am a Sword " guest stars Amy Sedaris , Agee , and Melinda Hill ; Sedaris plays Bandit Princess , Agee plays a Merchant and Science Cat , and Hill plays Space Bear and Sharon the spiky person .
Storyline writer Ashly Burch plays Bun Bun in the titular episode , which also features Keith David reprising his role as the former Flame King .
In " Elemental " , Lauren Lapkus is introduced as the voice of ice elemental , Patience St. Pim . "
Five Short Tables " sees the return of Madeleine Martin , Roz Ryan , Donald Glover , Grey DeLisle , and Emo Philips ; they voice Fionna , Cake , Marshall Lee , Ice Queen , and Cuber .
The episode also guest stars Hannibal Buress as Flame Prince , Crispin Freeman as Turtle Prince and Ice President , Keith Ferguson as Prince Gumball ( standing in lieu of the character 's original voice actor , Neil Patrick Harris , who was unavailable due to prior commitments ) , and Elle Newlands as Butterscotch Butler .
" The Music Hole " features several guest actors , including Ashley Eriksson as the titular Music Hole , and Jackie Buscarino as Susan Strong .
Alia Shawkat voices Charlie , Rich Sommer voices Grand Prix , and Reggie Watts voices the turtle announcer in " Daddy - Doughter Card Wars " .
" Preboot " sees the return of Buscarino as Susan Strong and Collin Dean as Tiffany ; the episode also introduces Lennon Parham as Dr. Gross .
Rainn Wilson reprises his role as Rattleballs , as well as voicing the adult version of Sparkle in " Reboot " .
The episode " Two Swords " introduces the character of Fern , voiced by Hayden Ezzy .
The next episode , " Do No Harm " , sees both Jeff Bennett and Hill reprise their roles as the Grass Wizard and Doctor Princess , respectively .
In " Wheels " , Marc Evan Jackson reprises his role as Kim Kil Whan , and Rae Gray guest stars as Jake 's granddaughter , Bronwyn .
Ron Lynch returns as Mr. Pig in " High Strangeness " . "
Horse & Ball " features British animator James Baxter , who voices the horse of the same name .
Alan Tudyk returns to voice the character Chatsberry in "
Jelly Beans Have Power " .
The Islands miniseries features Josh Fadem as Whipple the sea - dragon , Helena Mattsson as Alva , Reggie Watts as Vinny , Jasika Nicole as Frieda , Livvy Stubenrauch as young Kara / Susan , Sharon Horgan as Finn 's mother Minerva , and Laraine Newman as the Widow .
The miniseries also sees Lennon Parham reprise her role as Dr. Gross and Stephen Root return to voice Finn 's father , Martin .
Other characters are voiced by Dee Bradley Baker , Maria Bamford , Steve Little , and Melissa Villaseñor .
BROADCAST AND RECEPTION BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast and reception .
Section::::Broadcast .
Much like the sixth and seventh seasons , the eighth season of Adventure Time featured several " bomb " weeks , or weeks when new episodes debuted everyday .
The first of these began on January 23 , 2017 , with " Two Swords"/"Do
No Harm " and concluded on January 27 , 2017 , with " Jelly Beans Have Power " .
The second week - long string of episodes occurred between January 30 and February 2 , 2017 , during which the whole of Islands aired .
RATINGS
Section::::Ratings .
The season debuted on March 26 , 2016 , with the episode " Broke His Crown " .
It was watched by 1.13 million viewers and scored a 0.3 Nielsen rating in the 18 to 49-year - old demographic .
Nielsen ratings are audience measurement systems that determine the audience size and composition of television programming in the United States .
In this case the episode was seen by 0.3 percent of all households with viewers aged between 18 and 49 years old .
This marked a slight decrease in viewership compared to the season seven finale , " The Thin Yellow Line " , which was seen by 1.15 million individuals , but it marked a marginal increase compared to the previous season 's premiere , " Bonnie & Neddy " which had 1.07 million viewers .
The season concluded with the eight - part miniseries Islands .
This string of episodes saw an uptick in viewers , with the first two episodes scoring a 0.3 Nielsen rating in the
18- to 49-year - old demographic and being watched by 1.2 million viewers .
During the week that Islands aired , Adventure Time attained viewership numbers over 1 million for every episode .
Despite this , " Islands Part 8 : The Light Cloud " was still the lowest - rated finale for the show at the time of its airing .
REVIEWS AND ACCOLADES Section::::Reviews and accolades .
In a review for the episode " The Music Hole " , The A.V. Club writer Oliver Sava wrote , " I love that after seven seasons the show has n't lost sight of what makes it so compelling to such a wide audience .
" Each episode was also graded by The A.V. Club with a different letter grade ; Islands received an A , and the rest of the season received nine B 's , and nine A 's .
The A.V. Club did not review " Daddy - Daughter Card Wars " because episodic coverage of the series was intended to stop following the airing of " The Music Hole " .
However , after the airing of " Preboot " and " Reboot " , their episode coverage returned due to popular demand .
Islands was met with mostly positive reviews .
Many criticssuch as Zack Smith of Newsarama and Oliver Sava of The A.V. Clubapplauded how the miniseries started with quirky adventure episodes before culminating in an emotional finale .
Other critics complimented the greater development of the miniseries ' characters .
Zach Blumenfeld of Paste Magazine complimented the miniseries ' philosophical musings , which he argued " takes on shades of Black Mirror and existentialism to cast a critical eye on technology and the human spirit . "
In April 2017 , Common Sense Media awarded the Islands miniseries The Common Sense Seal , calling it a " beautiful animated miniseries
[ that ] explores a deep backstory .
"
In July 2017 , the Islands episode " Imaginary Resources " won a Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Animation at the 69th Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Warner Home Video released several DVD compilations that contain episodes from the eighth season .
The first was Card Wars , released on July 12 , 2016 .
The second release , Islands — which included all of the titular miniseries — was released on DVD on January 24 , 2017 .
This release was notable because it marked the second time that Adventure Time episodes had been released on DVD before officially airing on Cartoon Network .
The first instance was the release of the episode " Princess Day " on the DVD of the same name on July 29 , 2014 , before it first aired on TV on July 31 , 2014 ) .
US RELEASE Section::::US release .
A DVD set that includes season eight along with seasons nine and ten was released in the United States on September 4 , 2018 .
valign="top " valign="top " * Seasons 810 * 58 episodes
* 1.78:1 aspect ratio
* Subtitles :
English * English ( Dolby Stereo ) colspan="2
" align="left " width="200 " * Animatics
* Song demoes
* Character art gallery
*
Behind the scenes featurette colspan="4 " align="center " Release dates align="center " Region 1 align="center
"
Region 4 align="center " Region A align="center " Region B align="center " September 4 , 2018 align="center " TBA align="center
" TBA align="center " November 28 , 2018 AUSTRALIAN RELEASE Section::::Australian release .
On November 27 , 2018 , the season was released by itself on DVD and Blu - ray in Australia .
valign="top " valign="top " * Season 8 * 27 episodes
* 1.78:1 aspect ratio
* Subtitles :
English * English ( Dolby stereo ) colspan="2 " align="left " width="200 " * TBA colspan="4 " align="center " Release dates align="center
"
Region 1 align="center " Region 4 align="center " Region A align="center "
Region B align="center " N / A align="center "
align="center " N /
A align="center " NOTES REFERENCES