FIRST
THEY KILLED MY FATHER ( FILM )
First They Killed My Father
( Moun dambaung Khmer Krahm samleab ba robsa khnhom ) is a 2017 Cambodian – American Khmer biographical historical thriller film directed by Angelina Jolie and written by Jolie and Loung Ung , based on Ung 's memoir of the same name .
Set in 1975 , the film depicts 7-year - old Ung , who is forced to be trained as a child soldier while her siblings are sent to labor camps during the Communist Khmer Rouge regime .
The film screened at the Telluride Film Festival and 2017 Toronto International Film Festival , and was released worldwide on Netflix on September 15 , 2017 to positive critical reception .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
During the Vietnam War , the United States military begins bombing the neutral country of Cambodia , commencing the Cambodian Campaign .
The U.S. then pulls out of Cambodia and evacuates its embassy .
An officer of the Khmer National Armed Forces , Ung , known as " Pa " to his seven children , including 7-year - old Loung Ung , expresses regret for having trusted the Americans as the Khmer Rouge draw closer .
The Khmer Rouge forces all families to leave the city , under the pretext that it will be bombed by Americans , and join thousands of refugees .
Pa Ung denies working for the government when questioned by soldiers , knowing that he will be killed if discovered .
The family is found by " Uncle " , Pa 's brother - in - law , and Loung 's family stays with Uncle 's family for some time .
However , at the insistence of Uncle 's wife , who fears the consequences if Pa 's identity is discovered , Loung 's family has to leave .
After days of travel they are rounded up by Khmer Rouge soldiers and taken with other refugees to a labor camp , where they have to build their own shelter and are forced to work under harsh conditions .
Their possessions are confiscated , food is scarce as all crops are sent to fighting units , and any attempt to get more food is punished with beatings .
Loung is a witness to her siblings ' beatings as they try to get more food for themselves and their family .
Aside from hard work , the camp preaches the regime propaganda , and any foreign items ( including life - saving medicine ) are forbidden and carry a death penalty .
Loung 's two oldest brothers and oldest sister are re - assigned to other camps , and soon afterward her sister dies from sickness and starvation .
One day Loung sees Pa taken away by the officials to repair a bridge .
Knowing what awaits him , he says goodbye to his wife and children .
Later , Loung has a dream in which she sees him executed and buried in a mass grave .
Soon afterward , Ma tells Loung , her brother , and her older sister Kim to flee in different directions and seek new working camps under false identities as orphans .
Loung and her sister separate from their brother and reach another camp .
There , Loung is recruited to be a child soldier for the Khmer Rouge .
The Vietnamese have invaded Cambodia , sparking the Cambodian – Vietnamese War .
Loung learns hand to hand combat , shooting , and preparation of traps , and works on laying mine fields against the Vietnamese .
Children are constantly taught propaganda and hatred of the Vietnamese , but they get more food and are treated better than workers in the labor camps .
One day Loung gets a pass to visit her sister in the labor camp , but instead she travels to the camp where her mother and youngest sister were left behind .
She finds their hut empty , and an old woman tells her that her family was taken away by the soldiers .
That night Loung dreams about her mother lying dead in a mass grave with her youngest sister left next to her corpse to die .
Loung 's camp is destroyed by Vietnamese shelling , forcing her to flee along with other civilians .
On the road she reunites with her brother and sister and stay for a night in a temporary refugee camp managed by Vietnamese troops , where the siblings are joined by a group of children .
As the camp is attacked by Khmer Rouge forces in the next morning , they slip behind the defending Vietnamese to escape the fighting into jungle , where Loung is separated from her siblings and witnesses other refugees killed and maimed by the mines that she herself helped set up .
The three siblings are reunited in another refugee camp which is run by the Red Cross .
There Loung sees people beating a captured Khmer Rouge soldier .
She sees him as her father and flashes back to the violence in her life .
As she cries out , " Pa " , to the man , the aggressors disperse .
Loung looks at the beaten man and walks away .
As the war ends , Loung and her younger siblings are reunited with their older brothers who also survived the camps .
The movie ends with all the children in present time , praying with the monks for their lost family members at the ruins of a Buddhist temple .
CAST
* Sreymoch Sareum as Loung Ung * Kompheak Phoeung as Pa Ung * Socheta Sveng as Ma Ung * Mun Kimhak as Kim
* Sreyneang Oun as Keav Section::::Cast .
The film uses Cambodian actors and filmed in the Khmer language of Cambodia .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On July 23 , 2015 , it was announced that Angelina Jolie would next direct a film adaptation of the memoir
First They Killed My Father by Loung Ung for Netflix , for which Jolie and Ung co - wrote the script .
Jolie would also produce the film along with Rithy Panh , while Jolie 's son Maddox Jolie - Pitt would be an executive producer .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography on the film began in early November 2015 in Siem Reap and wrapped in February 2016 in Battambang , Cambodia .
Filming also took place in Phnom Penh .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 88 % based on 65 reviews , with an average rating of 7.8/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , "
First They Killed My Father tackles its subject matter with grace , skill , and empathy , offering a ground - level look at historic atrocities that resonates beyond its story 's borders .
" Metacritic , another review aggregator , assigned the film a weighted average score of 72 out of 100 , based on 21 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Matt Zoller Seitz of RogerEbert.com gave the film four out of four stars , stating that it was Jolie 's best work as a director yet , made without any compromise to its " journalistic " storytelling .
He noted that " [ t]he ace in Jolie 's deck here is the knowledge that a girl as young as Loung ca n't comprehend the larger meaning of what 's happening to her , and is therefore unlikely to expend precious emotional energy connecting cause - and - effect dots or lamenting what was lost .
It 's an almost entirely experiential movie . "
He later named it the second best film of the year , behind Lucky , stating that it is " [ o]ne of the greatest films about war ever made , as well as one of the best films about childhood ...
I ca n't imagine a frame of this film being better , only different . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
The film was selected as the Cambodian entry for the Best Foreign Language Film for the 90th Academy Awards , but it was not nominated .
It was the first time a prominent American director 's non - English film was submitted since the Academy set a rule in 1984 that a country 's submission has " artistic control " from a " creative talent of that country " ; Jolie has dual citizenshipCinema For Peace Awards
SEE ALSO
* List of submissions to the 90th Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film * List of Cambodian submissions for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS