THE SPACE BETWEEN US ( FILM )
The Space Between Us is a 2017 American romantic science fiction film directed by Peter Chelsom and written by Allan Loeb , from a story by Stewart Schill , Richard Barton Lewis and Loeb .
The film stars Gary Oldman , Asa Butterfield , Britt Robertson , and Carla Gugino , and follows a teenage boy , born on Mars , who travels to Earth .
Principal photography began on September 14 , 2015 , in Albuquerque , New Mexico .
The film was released on February 3 , 2017 by STXfilms .
It received negative reviews from critics and was a box office bomb , grossing $ 14.8 million against its $ 30 million budget .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In the near future , Nathaniel Shepard , CEO of Genesis , launches the first ever mission to colonize Mars .
During the journey , the lead astronaut , Sarah Elliot , discovers that she is pregnant .
Shortly after landing , she dies from eclampsia while giving birth to the first human born on Mars .
The father of the child is unknown .
In a dilemma , Nathaniel eventually decides to keep the child on Mars as a secret , to avoid a PR disaster for his company and also keep the child safe .
Sixteen years later , Sarah 's son , Gardner Elliot , has grown up into an inquisitive , highly intelligent boy who has only ever met 14 people in his very unconventional upbringing .
One day , in order to find out more about his mother , he hacks into Centaur , a robot he helped build , to gain access to the ship 's storage .
There , he retrieves his mother 's items .
Among them are a wedding ring and a USB drive , from which he plays a video of her and a man in a beach house .
Convinced that the man is his father , he becomes determined to find him .
Gardner logs on to an Internet chatroom , where he has struck up an online relationship with Tulsa , a street smart girl from Colorado who is constantly being shuffled from one foster home to the next .
Under the guise of being confined to a penthouse due to osteogenesis imperfecta , they discuss their plans for the future .
Gardner promises to come see her someday .
He then watches the German language film , Wings of Desire , where an angel falls to Earth .
His mother figure , astronaut Kendra Wyndham , video calls Nathaniel and Genesis director Tom Chen to inform them of Gardner 's extraordinary intelligence and to beg them to allow him to go to Earth .
Nathaniel refuses , as Gardner would have to undergo a highly risky surgery to increase his bone density and then train to adapt to Earth 's atmospheric pressure .
Gardner undergoes the surgery anyway and after training , he , Kendra and some other astronauts board a space shuttle for Earth .
On the day of the space shuttle 's arrival , Nathaniel discovers that Gardner is on board .
He angrily confronts Tom , who hid this from him .
Despite his anger , Nathaniel visits Gardner , who is being quarantined in NASA while undergoing medical tests to determine whether he is fit for life on Earth .
After a visit from Kendra , Gardner manages to discover that he is not fit for life on Earth .
Upset , he stages a daring escape and hitches a ride to find Tulsa .
Upon seeing him , Tulsa hits him as she is upset at Gardner for " ghosting " her for 7 months .
However , she forgives him and he convinces her to help him find his father .
They stop by her house to get supplies for the journey , but are found by Nathaniel and Kendra .
While trying to convince him to return to NASA , Gardner angrily confronts Kendra with her own admission of not wanting children and escapes with Tulsa on an old plane which her foster father was working on .
The plane abruptly loses oil pressure while still in the sky .
Tulsa manages to crash - land the plane into an old , abandoned barn , causing a fiery explosion .
They escape safely to a diner where they determine the location of the shaman who married Gardner 's parents , Shaman Neka .
Believing that Gardner has died , a grieving Nathaniel and Kendra let out their rage at one another .
After discovering that no bodies were found in the wreckage , they receive some devastating news – Gardner 's body contains dangerously high levels of troponin , meaning that he has an enlarged heart .
His heart is unable to stand Earth 's atmospheric pressure and so Gardner must be returned to Mars immediately if he is to survive .
The search is resumed with renewed fervor and they discover CCTV footage of Gardner and Tulsa in a supermarket parking lot , where they have bought clothes and supplies for the journey .
During the journey , Gardner tells Tulsa the truth – that he was born and raised on Mars .
Unwilling to accept the truth , she forces him out of the car but forgives him once he promises never to lie to her again , although she still does not believe him .
At night , they camp out under the stars , where they make love .
In the morning , they are discovered by a follower of Shaman Neka and are brought to him .
He agrees to help them .
Gardner 's nose starts bleeding , a fact he conceals while Tulsa accesses the records to get the location of the beach house , which is in Summerland , California .
Before they begin their journey , they make a detour to Las Vegas .
Gardner 's nose starts to bleed again and he collapses and is taken to a hospital .
After seeing the carbon tubes in his bones on the results of an X - ray at the hospital , Tulsa tells Gardner she now believes he was born on Mars , but plans to leave him in the hospital , before foster care can come , as he is too sick to continue their journey .
Gardner reveals that he knows he wo n't last on Earth anymore and all he wants is to meet his father before he dies .
Tulsa gives in and helps him escape .
They steal a car and drive to the beach house .
There , they meet the man from the video , who reveals that he is not Sarah Elliot 's husband , but her own brother .
However , he thinks that the two are lying to him .
Gardner runs down to the sea , where he tells Tulsa that this is where he wants to die .
He collapses .
Tulsa tries frantically to drag him to the shore , but he is too heavy for her .
Nathaniel and Kendra arrive just in time to save him .
After Nathaniel performs CPR on him , Gardner asks him about his mother Sarah and reveals that he knows that Nathaniel is his real father .
Nathaniel , Kendra and Tulsa rush Gardner to a Dream Chaser .
They plan to launch into the stratosphere to stabilize him .
When that proves to not be enough , a desperate Nathaniel takes control and launches into outer space .
Free of Earth 's gravity , Gardner is revived .
Soon , Gardner boards a space shuttle to Mars .
Tulsa and Gardner have an emotional parting .
Kendra , who is staying on Earth because she is retiring from NASA , adopts Tulsa .
Determined to join Gardner on Mars , Tulsa joins Kendra 's training program .
Back on Mars , with his father Nathaniel , Gardner is glad to be home .
CAST PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In 1999 , Universal Pictures and Mike Lobell Productions acquired a screenplay , then titled Mainland , about a rebellious teen born on the moon who desired to come to the earth but whose physiology , it was feared , would not be able to take the translation .
After failed rewrites by Allison Burnett ( Autumn in New York ) , the project was placed in turnaround , as Lobell left Universal for a deal at Castle Rock Entertainment .
The project remained unproduced for over a decade .
On March 13 , 2014 , Hollywood industry website The Tracking Board revealed that a science fiction - adventure film titled Out of This World was in development at Relativity Media , scripted by Allan Loeb .
Later in August 2014 , it was reported that Peter Chelsom , who had previously directed Hector and the Search for Happiness for Relativity , was hired to direct the film , while Relativity would produce and distribute .
Southpaw Entertainment 's Richard B. Lewis was attached to produce the film , and also received a " story by " credit .
On February 2 , 2015 , Asa Butterfield was tapped to play the lead character in the film , a teen who was raised on Mars , and who falls in love with a girl on Earth he has been communicating with .
Chelsom and Tinker Lindsay rewrote the screenplay .
On July 13 , 2015 , it was announced that Relativity was selling the project to STX Entertainment , in order to reach an agreement with its creditors and avoid having to file for bankruptcy .
STX produced and distributed the film .
On July 31 , 2015 , Gary Oldman , Carla Gugino , and Britt Robertson joined the cast of the then - untitled film .
Robertson would play the female lead , a teen girl from Colorado .
On September 8 , 2015 , it was announced that the title of the film would be The Space Between Us , and B. D. Wong and Janet Montgomery were added to the cast .
On September 30 , 2015 , Trey Tucker joined the film to play an astronaut , and on October 23 , 2015 , Scott Takeda was cast to play a doctor in the film .
Asa Butterfield and Britt Robertson have a seven - year age gap between them , which caused controversy , but in an interview Robertson explains that the age difference helped with the dynamic of the relationship between Tulsa and Gardner .
" I do n't think Tulsa is really a teenager .
She 's had to be an adult for a really long time .
She 's had to take care of herself .
She 's had to figure out where she 's going to live , and pay her mortgage or gas .
She thinks like an adult .
There 's this dynamic where she 's almost parenting him in some ways .
There 's this very specific kind of thing where she 's teaching him about the world ( saying ) , " Get it together , these are people .
Why are you doing it this way ?
Why are n't you being human ?
( Our age difference )
I think really helps the dynamic .
It 's not something I really pay attention to . "
Principal photography on the film began on September 14 , 2015 , in Albuquerque , New Mexico .
Andrew Lockington composed the film 's score , which was released through Sony Music Entertainment .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
In August 2015 , STX Entertainment scheduled the film to be released on July 29 , 2016 .
The release date was later switched with STX 's other release , Bad Moms , and was moved its release date later to August 19 , 2016 .
However , Kubo and the Two Strings , Ben - Hur , and War Dogs were all slated for August 19 , 2016 and STX Entertainment moved its release date later to December 21 , 2016 , allowing more time for work on the visual effects .
The film 's release date was later moved to December 16 , 2016 , and finally STX Entertainment moved its release date later to February 3 , 2017 .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The Space Between Us grossed $ 7.9 million in the United States and Canada and $ 6.9 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 14.8 million , against a production budget of $ 30 million .
In North America , The Space Between Us was released alongside Rings and The Comedian , and was projected to gross $ 8–10 million from 2,812 theaters during its opening weekend .
The film ended up grossing $ 1.4 million on its first day and $ 3.8 million in its opening weekend , finishing well below expectations , and 7th at the box office .
In its third weekend the film grossed $ 260,000 after being pulled from 2,441 theaters ( dropping 84.6 % to 331 ) , marking the 6th biggest theater drop in history .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 17 % based on 127 reviews , with an average rating of 4.2/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " The Space Between Us strands its star - crossed young lovers in a mind - numbingly vast expanse of shameless cheese that will send all but the most forgiving viewers eye - rolling for the exits .
" On Metacritic , the film holds a score 33 out of 100 , based on 32 critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A – " on an A+ to F scale .
Writing for IndieWire , David Ehrlich gave the film a grade of " C , " calling it a " guileless and good - natured sci - fi love story " .
Kevin Maher gave a scathing review in The Times , writing that the film is " notable only for some horrendously bad science and a career - low performance from Gary Oldman " .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Award !
Date of ceremony !
Category !
Nominee !
Result !
Ref .
SEE ALSO
* List of films set on Mars REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS