WHAT HAPPENED TO MONDAY
What Happened to Monday ( known as Seven Sisters in Canada , France , Spain , Portugal , Italy , Poland , Slovakia , Hungary and Japan ) is a 2017 dystopian science fiction thriller film , written by Max Botkin and Kerry Williamson , directed by Tommy Wirkola and starring Noomi Rapace , Glenn Close and Willem Dafoe .
The film was released theatrically in Europe and Asia and Netflix bought the streaming rights to the film for the United States as well as the U.K. and Latin America .
Netflix released the film on August 18 , 2017 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Around the year 2043 , overpopulation has caused a worldwide crisis , resulting in a strict , one - child policy enforced by the Child Allocation Bureau .
When multiple children are born to one mother , all but the eldest are put into cryosleep .
All citizens are tracked by electronic bracelets .
Karen Settman dies while giving birth to identical - septuplet sisters .
Their grandfather , Terrence , names them after the days of the week and trains them to pose as a single individual named after their mother , leaving the house only on the day of their name .
To safeguard their secret , Terrence ensures they share information daily and replicate any physical accidents that alter appearance .
The sisters use wigs and makeup to cover any identifying features , with Terry even going as far to keep them safe by amputating the tip of the first finger of each sister after Thursday injures herself .
Years later in 2073 , as Sunday returns from the church , she sees C.A.B. agents detain a child as onlookers protest .
The siblings watch the recorded incident and debate turning themselves in , but not seriously .
The following day , Monday prepares her disguise as Karen , nervous about giving a presentation .
At a checkpoint , Monday runs into Adrian Knowles , a C.A.B. agent who flirts with her .
At the bank , Monday 's co - worker , Jerry , a competitor for the promotion , hints at blackmailing her .
When Monday fails to return home , Tuesday retraces her steps .
Tuesday learns that Monday got the promotion and met Jerry at a bar .
Before she can investigate further , C.A.B. agents detain her and cut off her communications .
In the C.A.B. facility , Adrian sees Tuesday being escorted to a cell , where she meets Nicolette Cayman , head of the Bureau and a candidate for parliament .
Cayman explains that she knows about Tuesday 's siblings , and , when Tuesday offers a bribe , Cayman reveals Monday offered the same deal .
Cayman orders C.A.B. agents to assassinate Tuesday 's sisters .
C.A.B. agents use a severed eye to bypass a retinal scanner at the Settman home .
Thursday ambushes the agents as they arrest the other siblings .
The sisters kill the agents , but Sunday dies .
Learning the eye is Tuesday 's , the sisters suspect Jerry may have sold them out .
The next day , Wednesday leaves without disguising herself and confronts Jerry .
He reveals that " Karen " got the promotion when she sent millions of euros to Cayman to fund her campaign .
After a C.A.B. sniper kills him , Wednesday flees Jerry 's apartment .
The others remotely guide Wednesday to safety but are interrupted when Adrian shows up at the sisters ' apartment , concerned about " Karen .
" They deduce that Adrian has been having a long - term sexual relationship with one of the sisters , and Thursday convinces Saturday to leave with him .
Saturday , pretending to be Karen , has sex with Adrian at his apartment and covertly links their bracelets , allowing Friday to hack into the C.A.B. On a video feed , the sisters believe they have found Monday in a holding cell .
Meanwhile , C.A.B. agents corner and kill Wednesday .
After Adrian leaves his apartment , C.A.B. agents kill Saturday as she tells them Monday was dating Adrian .
The sisters ' apartment are raided simultaneously by a C.A.B. squad led by Joe .
Admitting that she can not survive on her own , Friday sacrifices herself to allow Thursday to escape and rescue Monday .
Adrian hears about the incident and rushes back to the Settman apartment .
Thursday confronts him , blaming him for her sisters ' deaths .
Adrian now realizes " Karen " is an assumed identity for several siblings , and claims to love Monday .
Thursday reveals to Adrian that Monday is still alive , and he agrees to help her .
Adrian sneaks Thursday into C.A.B. headquarters in a body bag .
While in the bag , she secretly records a child undergoing cryosleep .
Instead of being frozen , the child is incinerated .
After overpowering the guards , Adrian and Thursday proceed to rescue Monday .
However , when they reach her prison cell , they discover Tuesday inside .
They deduce that Monday has sold them out to Cayman .
As Cayman hosts a fundraiser , Thursday shoots Monday and leaves her for dead while Tuesday and Adrian broadcast Thursday 's video footage .
The crowd turns on Cayman , who insists that she only did what was necessary .
Monday staggers into the fundraiser but Joe shoots her , thinking that she intended to kill Cayman .
Adrian shoots
Joe in turn .
As the crowd flees , a dying Monday reveals to the others that she is pregnant and makes Thursday promise to not let the C.A.B. take her unborn children .
In the aftermath , the Child Allocation Act is repealed and Cayman faces the death penalty .
Thursday , Adrian , and Tuesday watch Monday 's and Adrian 's twins develop in an artificial womb .
Tuesday and Thursday rename themselves Terry and Karen , respectively .
CAST * Noomi Rapace as The Settman Siblings – Monday , Tuesday , Wednesday , Thursday , Friday , Saturday , and Sunday – septuplets sharing the identity of Karen Settman , a banker *
Clara Read as The Young Settman Siblings
* Willem Dafoe as Terrence Settman , the siblings ' grandfather * Glenn Close as Nicolette Cayman , the head of the Child Allocation Bureau
( C.A.B. ) * Marwan Kenzari as Adrian Knowles , a C.A.B. security guard * Christian Rubeck as Joe , the head of Security of the C.A.B.
* Pål Sverre Hagen as Jerry , Karen 's coworker * Tomiwa Edun as Eddie , the septuplets ' doorman * Cassie Clare as Zaquia , a C.A.B. agent * Robert Wagner as Charles Benning , a journalist RELEASE Section::::Release .
What Happened to Monday premiered at the 2017 Locarno Festival .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Rotten Tomatoes , a review aggregator , reports that 60 % of 30 surveyed critics gave the film a positive review , with an average rating of 5.8/10 .
Jessica Kiang of Variety called it a " ludicrous , violent , amusingly dumb sci - fi actioner " .
Kiang said that , although it is full of plot holes and Rapace 's characters are thinly characterized , it is likely to become a cult film .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
What Happened to Monday on Netflix