THOUSAND ISLAND DRESSING Thousand Island dressing is an American salad dressing and condiment based on mayonnaise and can include olive oil , lemon juice , orange juice , paprika , Worcestershire sauce , mustard , vinegar , cream , chili sauce , tomato purée , ketchup or Tabasco sauce .
It is one of the most common alternative spreads on a Reuben sandwich if one is not using Russian dressing .
It also typically contains finely chopped ingredients , which can include pickles , onions , bell peppers , green olives , hard - boiled egg , parsley , pimento , chives , garlic , or chopped nuts ( such as walnuts or chestnuts ) .
ORIGINS Section::::Origins .
According to The Oxford Companion to American Food and Drink , the dressing 's name comes from the Thousand Islands region , located along the upper St. Lawrence River between the United States and Canada .
Within that region , one common version of the dressing 's origins says that a fishing guide 's wife , Sophia LaLonde , made the condiment as part of her husband George 's shore dinner .
Often in this version , actress May Irwin requested the recipe after enjoying it .
Irwin , in turn , gave it to another .
In another , second version of the story , Thousand Islands summer resident , George Boldt , who built Boldt Castle between 1900 and 1904 and who was proprietor of the Waldorf - Astoria Hotel , instructed the hotel 's maître d'hôtel , Oscar Tschirky , to put the dressing on the menu in 1894 after he forgot dressing on salads and improvised with what ingredients were on hand at the time .
A 1959 National Geographic article states , " Thousand Island Dressing was reportedly developed by Boldt 's chef . "
Despite claims that he was involved in the introduction of the salad dressing at the Waldorf , chef Tschirky did not mention the salad dressing in his cookbook that was published during that time period .
When University of Wisconsin sociologist Michael Bell and his graduate students attempted to determine the origin of Thousand Island dressing in 2010 , they found that the story differed among villages and islands in the Thousand Islands region .
They discovered the existence of a third origin story in which the original recipe was based upon French dressing , which is supported by a recipe published in the 11th edition of The Fannie Farmer Cookbook ( 1965 ) .
All the claims appeared to be based upon oral traditions without supporting written records .
According to Food & Wine magazine , the dressing was a traditional sauce from the late 19th century in the Thousand Islands region .
The wealthy who visited the region carried bottles of the local sauce back to New York City , such as one variant found in Clayton , New York called Sophia 's Sauce found at a local hotel , Herald Hotel run by innkeeper Sophia Lelonde .
Some food writers advance the claim that the dressing was invented by chef Theo Rooms of the Blackstone Hotel in Chicago during the same time period .
The food historians at the Food Timeline point out that the earliest print references to Thousand Island dressing appear in 1912 , and that recipes for different versions of the dressing begin to appear afterwards throughout the U.S.
USES Section::::Uses .
It is widely used in fast - food restaurants and diners in the United States , where it is often referred to as " special sauce " or " secret sauce " .
An example of this is In -
N - Out Burger 's " spread " , served on burgers and several " secret menu " items ; despite its name , it is a variation of Thousand Island dressing .
Thousand Island dressing is often used in a Reuben sandwich in lieu of Russian dressing .
McDonald 's Big Mac sauce is a variation on Thousand Island dressing .
SIMILAR PREPARATIONS Section::::Similar preparations .
Rhode Island dressing ( Rhode islandsås ) , introduced by the Swedish restaurateur Tore Wretman , is similar to Thousand Island and very popular in Sweden .
Its name is confusing , especially for foreigners , and its origin unclear , since the dressing has no relationship to Rhode Island and the name is not used for similar preparations outside Sweden .
In Germany , a similar salad dressing is called " American dressing " .
SEE ALSO
*
Fry sauce *
Marie Rose sauce * Russian dressing *
Salsa golf
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Thousand Islands :
Thousand Islands Dressing early printed citations collected by Barry Popik