CANNABIS IN UTAH
Recreational use of cannabis in Utah is illegal , and possession of small amounts is a misdemeanor crime .
Utah banned cannabis in 1915 , making it one of the first states to do so .
The state legalized non - psychoactive CBD oil to treat severe epilepsy in March 2014 , making it the first state to legalize only CBD oil without legalizing other forms of cannabis .
PROHIBITION ( 1915 )
Section::::Prohibition ( 1915 ) .
Utah is frequently cited as the first state to explicitly ban cannabis , which they did in 1915 , though other scholars state that California was actually the first , in 1913 , and that Utah 's claim to be first is based on a misunderstanding of California 's earlier law and the lack of public attention its passing received .
Scholar David E. Newton notes that Utah law is an area of controversy among cannabis historians : some scholars believe the law was a reaction to cannabis usage by Mormon returnees from Mexico following the 1910 revolution , and based on an August 1915 prohibition on cannabis by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter - day Saints ( LDS Church ) .
Other scholars however note that cannabis was simply not an issue of public attention in Utah during that period , and submit that Utah simply banned cannabis as part of a larger anti - drug legislation based on earlier California law , rather than as a response to any cannabis situation in Utah .
CBD LEGALIZATION ( 2014 ) Section::::CBD legalization ( 2014 ) .
In March 2014 , House Bill 105 was signed by Governor Gary Herbert , legalizing possession and use of low - THC CBD oil by registered patients with a physician 's recommendation and intractable epilepsy .
However , the bill included no provision for patients to legally acquire the oil .
MEDICAL CANNABIS LEGISLATION 2015 Section::::Medical cannabis legislation .
Section::::2015 .
Senate Bill 259 was a proposed by Senator Mark B. Madsen ( Republican - Saratoga Springs ) with eight working days left in the legislative session .
Under the bill , those with AIDS , Alzheimer 's disease , amyotrophic lateral sclerosis , an autoimmune disorder , cachexia or physical wasting , nausea , or malnutrition associated with chronic disease , cancer , Crohn 's disease , epilepsy , or a condition that causes debilitating seizures , glaucoma , multiple sclerosis or a similar condition that causes persistent and debilitating muscle spasms , post - traumatic stress disorder , or severe , chronic pain would be able to use medical marijuana legally .
The bill would fail in the Senate on a 15–14 vote , with several senators citing the relative rush behind the bill as the reason for their no vote .
Madsen stated that he would try again in the 2016 session .
2016
Section::::2016 .
In 2016 , Senator Madsen once again attempted to pass legislation legalizing the use of medical cannabis with .
Just as in 2015 , the legislation would have allowed medicinal use for a host of ailments including HIV , AIDS , Alzheimer 's disease , amyotrophic lateral sclerosis , cancer , cachexia , or such condition manifest by physical wasting , nausea , or malnutrition associated with chronic disease , Crohn 's disease or a similar gastrointestinal disorder , epilepsy or a similar condition that causes debilitating seizures , multiple sclerosis or a similar condition that causes persistent and debilitating muscle spasms , post - traumatic stress disorder related to military service ; and chronic pain in an individual .
The legislation also put into place a more robust cultivation , tracking , distribution , and enforcement models in direct response to this lacking information in the 2015 bill and advocated for whole plant usage .
During debate on the bill in the Senate , Madsen would make several concessions and amendments to his bill ( in one case voting against his own amendment dropping the whole plant legalization on principal , but proposing it in order to keep the bill alive ) .
His actions would cause the bill to pass the Senate 17 - 12 .
The House Health and Human Services Committee , however , failed to pass the bill out of committee along a 4 - 8 vote .
This would be Madsen 's last attempt at the legislation as he chose not to run for reelection in 2016 .
Also during 2016 , Senator Evan Vickers ( Republican - Cedar City ) would propose Senate Bill 89 .
Vickers ' legislation would expand the use of low - THC CBD oil ( as opposed to whole plant use ) to additional illnesses and also put into place cultivation , tracking , distribution , and enforcement models , but would also include provisions for product testing and research .
The legislation would pass the Senate 18 - 8 and the House Health and Human Services Committee by a vote of 7 - 5 .
The full House , however , did not consider the bill .
Finally , Senator Brian Shiozawa ( Republican - Salt Lake City ) would successfully pass Senate Concurrent Resolution 11 .
This nonbinding resolution unanimously passed the Senate and House and urges Congress to reclassify marijuana as a Schedule II drug , thereby allowing study of the drug for medicinal purposes .
2018
Section::::2018 .
In February 2018 , the Utah House of Representatives passed HB 195 , a bill to legalize the " right to try " and grow medical marijuana plants for terminally ill patients .
On March 7 , the bill was passed " easily " by the state senate , and on March 21 , the governor signed it into law .
On November 6 , 2018 , The Utah Medical Cannabis act ( as ballot Proposition 2 ) passed .
Provisions must be set by the state for dispensaries to open by January 2021 .
On December 3 , 2018 , the Utah Legislature passed HB3001 , amending the Utah Medical Cannabis Act as passed through Proposition 2 .
The Governor signed HB3001 into law later the same day , causing it to go into immediate effect .
2016
GOVERNOR RACE Section::::2016 governor race .
In April 2016 , police visited the home of Democratic gubernatorial candidate Mike Weinholtz , and seized medical marijuana belonging to his wife Donna .
This occurred days before Weinholtz 's acceptance of his party 's nomination .
Local authorities opted to pursue misdemeanor possession charges against Donna Weinholtz , and federal authorities chose not to pursue charges .
Donna Weinholtz used medical marijuana to treat pain from arthritis and a degenerative spinal condition In October 2016 she pled guilty to misdemeanor possession , agreeing to a fine and probation .
During an " emotional news conference " , Mike Weinholtz called for reform of Utah 's medical marijuana system .
SEE
ALSO * Cannabis and Latter - day Saints REFERENCES