BETTER LATE THAN NEVER ( TV SERIES )
Better Late Than Never was an American reality - travel show that airs on NBC and is produced by Universal Television ( under its Universal Television Alternative name ) , in association with Storyline Entertainment .
The series is an adaptation of the South Korean Grandpas Over Flowers series .
The cast includes four " seasoned " North American celebrities William Shatner , Henry Winkler , George Foreman and Terry Bradshaw , accompanied by younger comedian Jeff Dye , as they travel overseas without luxuries , experiencing new cultures and checking off their bucket lists .
The series started productions in August 2015 and premiered August 23 , 2016 .
On September 22 , 2016 , NBC renewed the series for a second season , set in various European countries , which premiered on January 1 , 2018 .
A special preview aired on December 11 , 2017 .
On July 16 , 2018 , the series was cancelled after two seasons .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In late 2014 , NBC bought the remake rights for the South Korean series Grandpas Over Flowers from CJ E&M.
The original show was one of the first successful programs for cable tvN and had two spin - off shows .
It premiered in 2013 , reached a high local rating of 12.5 percent , and became popular in other Asian countries , with the combination of veteran actors in their seventies and a popular young actor attracting a wide demographic range of viewers for a reality show .
The show is being produced by cast member Winkler , along with Jason Ehrlich , producer of The Bachelor and The Bachelorette , Tim Crescenti , of
I Survived a Japanese Game Show and Storyline Entertainment 's two producers Craig Zadan and Neil Meron , of The Bucket List .
Plans for the series were announced in June 2015 .
Productions started in Japan in August , and on August 12 , 2015 , the cast was interviewed by comedian Bibiru Ōki on Japan 's Nippon TV talk show PON ! , and filmed for the NBC show with the Japanese cast .
Also in August , the cast visited South Korea , arriving in Seoul on August 20 for a three - day trip , including a visit to COEX for filming with cameo guests , K - pop girl group Girls ' Generation , and trips to Hwaseong Fortress , Caribbean Bay , Itaewon , and the Korean Demilitarized Zone Japan , including Tokyo and Kyoto , was the first stop for the show , with more trips to include Seoul , Hong Kong , Phuket and Chiang Mai .
According to NBC , the five cast members will rely on each other for support and encouragement and demonstrate that friendship is the ultimate gift .
While filming the show in Southeast Asia , Shatner , the oldest cast member at age 84 , became interested in Buddhism and meditation after spending time with a Buddhist monk .
He said , " The disaster of death is encroaching
so I 'm more and more aware of how beautiful it is to be alive . "
CAST Section::::Cast .
The cast includes actor , producer , writer and director Henry Winkler , best known for his character The Fonz from the series Happy Days ; actor , director and writer William Shatner who starred as , among other roles , Capt .
James T. Kirk
in ; four - time Super Bowl - winning quarterback and current football broadcaster Terry Bradshaw ; and former heavyweight boxing champion George Foreman .
Like the original show , the older cast will be accompanied by a younger cast member , comedian Jeff Dye , from NBC 's Last Comic Standing , who will take on the equivalent role as Lee Seo - jin 's , as " bag carrier and human navigator . "
* William Shatner
* Henry Winkler * George Foreman * Terry Bradshaw * Jeff Dye EPISODES SEASON 1 ( 2016 ) :
ASIA
SEASON 2
( 2017–18 ) :
EUROPE RECEPTION AND IMPACT Section::::Reception and impact .
This is the first time a South Korean local variety program was adapted by a North American national broadcast network .
During production time , the show 's sponsors , Korea Tourism Organization , anticipated the advertising effect of the airing of the Korea episode on NBC prime time to amount to as much as 11 billion won ( $ 9.2 million dollars ) .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS