SAMSUNG GALAXY NOTE 5
The Samsung Galaxy Note 5 ( marketed as Samsung Galaxy Note5 ) is an Android phablet smartphone developed and produced by Samsung Electronics .
Unveiled on 13 August 2015 , it is the successor to the Galaxy Note 4 and part of the Samsung Galaxy Note series .
The Galaxy Note 5 carries over hardware and software features from the Galaxy S6 , including a refreshed design with a glass backing , improved camera , and fingerprint scanner .
The device also includes built in livestreaming functionality as well as features meant for use with the device 's bundled , spring - loaded stylus .
The device was released together with the Samsung Galaxy S6 Edge+ .
The device received positive reviews from critics , who praised the upgraded build quality over prior models , along with improvements to its performance , camera , and other changes .
Similarly to the S6 , Samsung was criticized for making the Galaxy Note 5 's battery non - removable , and removing the ability to expand its storage via microSD .
It was argued that these changes potentially alienated power users — especially because the Galaxy Note series had historically been oriented towards this segment of the overall market .
The Galaxy Note 5 was briefly succeeded by the Samsung Galaxy Note 7 , released in September 2016 .
However , that device was ultimately recalled and pulled from the market after repeated incidents where batteries overheated and caught on fire .
The discontinued Note 7 was later re - launched as Galaxy Note Fan Edition in July 2017 .
DXO Labs gave the Note 5 a dxomark of 85 ( a new dxomark of 82 )
SPECIFICATIONS HARDWARE
Section::::Specifications .
Section::::Hardware .
The Galaxy Note 5
adopts a similar design and construction to the Galaxy S6 , featuring a unibody metal frame and glass backing , although unlike the standard S6 , the back of the device is curved .
It is offered in dark blue , white , gold , and silver color finishes .
The storage slot for the S Pen stylus uses a spring - loaded mechanism to eject the pen .
The Galaxy Note 5 has a non - removable 3,000 mAh lithium - ion battery and supports the Qi open interface standard .
The Note 5 features a 5.7-inch 1440p Super AMOLED display .
It is powered by a 64-bit Exynos 7 Octa 7420 system - on - chip , consisting of four 2.1 GHz Cortex - A57 cores , and four 1.5 GHz Cortex - A53 cores , and 4 GB of LPDDR4 RAM .
The Galaxy Note 5 is available with either 32 GB or 64 GB of storage ( a special " Winter Edition " exclusive to South Korea offers 128 GB storage ) , and utilizes a 3020 mAh battery with wireless and fast charging support .
Similarly to the S6 , the Note 5 does not offer expandable storage or the ability to remove the battery , unlike its predecessor .
As with the S6 , the fingerprint scanner in the home button now uses a touch - based scanning mechanism rather than swipe - based , and the device also supports Samsung Pay .
The 16-megapixel rear - facing camera is identical to the Galaxy S6 , with a f/1.9 aperture , optical image stabilization , object tracking autofocus , and real - time HDR .
SOFTWARE
Section::::Software .
The Galaxy Note 5 shipped with Android Lollipop .
The new " Screen off memo " feature allows the phone to be awoken directly to a note screen when the stylus is removed .
The Camera app on the Note 5 also allows public and private livestreaming directly to YouTube , and supports export of RAW images .
In February 2016 , Samsung began to release Marshmallow for the Galaxy Note 5 .
The Galaxy Note 5 also gradually received the Nougat ( Android 7.0 ) update with TouchWiz Grace UX during the first and second quarters of 2017 .
EUROPEAN RELEASE
Section::::European release .
The Galaxy Note 5 was not released in Europe , in favour of solely marketing the S6 Edge+ in the region .
Samsung European Vice President of Brand and Marketing Rory O'Neill explained that the decision was based upon market research showing that consumers in the region primarily viewed large - screen phones as being oriented towards entertainment , and not productivity .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The Verge complimented the higher - quality build of the Galaxy Note 5 , describing it as being a " more humane device " due to its lighter build with thinner bezels in comparison to the Galaxy Note 4 , along with its display , performance and additional S Pen features .
However , the Galaxy Note 5 was panned for not offering a removable battery , expandable storage , or a 128 GB model , considering these oversights to be inappropriate for a device in a series that was " unapologetically meant for power users .
" The device was also described as being the result of Samsung " [ holding themselves ] back " , having dropped the " old , unfettered excessiveness of the old Note " in favour of developing a " consumer - friendly " device with only minor upgrades over the S6 .
Techradar shared a similar degree of positivity towards the Galaxy Note 5 , noting that " the sacrifices Samsung felt it needed to make to get to that premium Note 5 design have turned off some longtime users .
Thankfully , there 's a lot more to like about this phone upgrade than dislike . "
Following its release , it was discovered that inserting the pen into the Note 5 's storage slot backwards could result in permanent damage to the spring mechanism , making the stylus become stuck , or damaging the sensor that detects when the S Pen is removed ; all of these scenarios render the stylus unusable .
Samsung was aware of this issue and stated that it had provided a warning against backward pen insertion in the Galaxy Note 5 's manual , but placed more prominent warning labels on the device itself on later shipments .
In January 2016 , it was reported that the design of the mechanism had been revised to allow the safe ejection of a pen accidentally inserted backwards , without causing damage to the sensor .
SALES Section::::Sales .
In its first three days on sale , over 75,000 units of the Note 5 ( together with the S6 Edge+ ) were sold in South Korea , exceeding the rate of sales of the previous year 's models .
A study by AnTuTu detailed that this smartphone was one of the most popular Android devices in the first half of 2016 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS