GILMORE GIRLS ( SEASON 6 )
The sixth season of Gilmore Girls , an American dramedy television series , began airing on September 13 , 2005 on The WB television network .
The season concluded on May 9 , 2006 , after 22 episodes .
The season aired Tuesday nights at 8/7c .
This was the final season to air on The WB , before the network and rival UPN merged to form The CW in the fall of 2006 .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
The season begins at the moment the fifth season ended , with Lorelai having just proposed to Luke .
Luke accepts but they decide to delay the wedding until after she has reconciled with Rory .
During the estrangement , Lorelai buys a dog , Paul Anka .
Rory is given 300 hours community service for the boat theft and Emily gets her a job in the office at the DAR .
However , Rory begins to resent Emily 's attempts to turn her into her and , after five months apart , moves back home and returns to Yale .
Doyle steps down as editor of the Yale Daily News and is replaced by Paris .
The couple gets an apartment near college and Rory moves into their spare room .
However , Paris soon alienates the newsroom with her bullying style of leadership and is voted out , with Rory chosen to replace her .
Paris throws Rory out
and she moves in with Logan but the girls reconcile after falling out with their boyfriends for the night .
Logan is injured during a Life and Death Brigade stunt and Rory nurses him during his convalescence .
Zach becomes jealous of Lane 's friendship with Brian and starts a fight on stage as the band are about to play for a record label .
However , Zach manages to bring everyone back together and proposes to Lane .
They marry towards the end of the season .
Christopher inherits a large sum of money from his father and offers to do something for Lorelai and Rory .
Rory asks him to pay her Yale fees , freeing her from her obligation to Richard and Emily , but a Friday night working through their difficulties sees the Gilmores on good terms again .
Michel objects to Luke being used as an unofficial handyman at the inn
but this turns out to be because he misses his planning sessions with Lorelai .
Lorelai and Sookie throw themselves into organising the wedding but Luke learns he has a 12-year - old daughter , April Nardini , when she comes in wanting a DNA test .
He hides her from Lorelai for two months and even then keeps them apart , since he is worried April will get on better with
her and April 's mother Anna does n't want her getting attached to someone who might not be permanent .
Luke postpones the wedding while he gets to know April .
Lorelai discovers Kirk is helping Richard and Emily look at properties in Stars Hollow but
it turns out they are looking for a marital home for her and Luke .
In the season finale , Logan graduates from college and Rory throws him a farewell party before Mitchum sends him to London for a year .
Lorelai saves Christopher from a blind date Emily has set him up with , then tries to get Luke to elope with her
but he refuses .
The season closes with Lorelai waking up to discover she has spent the night with Christopher .
CAST MAIN CAST * Lauren Graham as Lorelai Gilmore * Alexis Bledel as Rory Gilmore * Melissa McCarthy as Sookie St. James * Scott Patterson as Luke Danes * Keiko Agena as Lane Kim
* Yanic Truesdale as Michel Gerard * Liza Weil as Paris Geller
* Sean Gunn as Kirk Gleason * Matt Czuchry as Logan Huntzberger * Kelly Bishop as Emily Gilmore * Edward Herrmann as Richard Gilmore RECURRING CAST * Jackson Douglas as Jackson Belleville * Liz Torres as Miss Patty
* Emily Kuroda as Mrs. Kim * Sally Struthers as Babette Dell
* Ted Rooney as Morey Dell * Michael Winters as Taylor Doose * David Sutcliffe as Christopher Hayden * Todd Lowe as Zach Van Gerbig
* John Cabrera as Brian Fuller * Sebastian Bach as Gil *
Danny Strong as Doyle McMaster * Kathleen Wilhoite as Liz Danes * Michael DeLuise as TJ * Gregg Henry as Mitchum Huntzberger * Sherilyn Fenn as Anna Nardini * Vanessa Marano as April Nardini
GUEST
* Melora Hardin as Carolyn Bates * Milo Ventimiglia as Jess Mariano EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
DVD RELEASE
* 22 episodes
* 6-disc set * 1.33:1 aspect ratio
* 1.78:1 aspect ratio ( international )
* Subtitles :
Spanish and French * English ( Dolby Digital 2 0 Surround ) * None REFERENCES