HUMPHREY
GOODMAN
Detective Inspector Humphrey Goodman is a character in the crime drama television series Death in Paradise , portrayed by Kris Marshall .
Goodman is assigned to Saint Marie after the murder of D.I. Richard Poole at the start of Series 3 .
Clues from Poole 's investigation helped Goodman reveal the motive and the killer 's identity ; Goodman commented that Poole had ' solved his own murder . '
Goodman stayed on in Saint Marie after his wife Sally announced she would not be joining him on the Caribbean island .
He became the chief inspector on the island , and took to Poole 's old habit of announcing the murderer in front of all the suspects and his police team .
He is very clumsy , often forgetting things or finding himself with nothing to take notes on ; he embraces Caribbean life much more than his predecessor .
He has a knack at being able to solve murders instantly , looking at the meaning of small details , much like his predecessor .
He fell in love with his detective sergeant , Camille Bordey , often coming close to revealing his feelings for her .
He tried to stop her leaving when she requested a job in Paris , but conceded .
He shared a passionate kiss with her just before she left the island .
Her successor , Florence Cassell , also managed to get along with Goodman , often sharing jokes and they dedicate a drink to Camille after their first solved case .
During the fifth season , a running sub - plot involved Goodman attempting to get back into the dating game , but his results were various degrees of failure until he ran into Martha , a woman who once ran a sandwich shop he frequented when he worked in London , in the season finale .
In the sixth season , Martha returns to the island for a few weeks , but while she and Goodman enjoy their time together , she eventually returns to London to start her dream job at a new restaurant .
When a subsequent case sends Goodman and his team to London to track their suspects , he is inspired to stay with Martha , nominating the recently widowed DI Jack Mooney-
the team 's London liaison for their latest case- as his successor in Saint Marie .
Goodman is awkward and accident prone .
Michael Hogan argues that " his bumbling and stammering resemble a Hugh Grant impersonation . " REFERENCES