ALEX VAUSE Alex Vause is a fictional character played by Laura Prepon on the Netflix series Orange Is the New Black .
The character is loosely based on the real ex - girlfriend of Piper Kerman , author of .
Before her arrest , Vause worked for an international drug cartel and was in a relationship with protagonist Piper Chapman , who once transported drug money for her during their travels .
Vause is portrayed as the catalyst for Chapman 's indictment .
She is reunited with her ex - lover in federal prison , nearly a decade after the events that led to their breakup .
Her relationship with Chapman is reignited , as they carry out a tumultuous love affair in prison .
Vause is noted for her pragmatism , forthrightness , wit and veiled vulnerability .
She is a main character in seasons one , three , four , five , and six and a recurring character in season two .
INSPIRATION
Section::::Inspiration .
The character of Alex Vause is loosely based on Catherine Cleary Wolters , ex - girlfriend of Piper Kerman , the author of and an executive consultant on the series .
In Kerman 's memoir , Wolters is given the pseudonym Nora Jansen , who is a marginal character in the book .
In actuality , Kerman and Wolters did not serve their prison sentences together as depicted in the series ; however , they were reunited in a flight to Chicago , where they were detained for several weeks in a detention facility to testify in the drug trafficking case .
Their stint in Chicago is portrayed in the series ' second season ; however , the defendant they were to testify against was changed to the cartel 's kingpin , as was the fact that Wolters and Kerman were cell - mates in the prison .
Wolters met Kerman in 1991 in Northampton , Massachusetts , becoming friends around the time Kerman graduated from Smith College .
Kerman wrote in her memoir that Wolters was part of a " clique of impossibly stylish and cool lesbians in their mid-30s " .
Wolters said both of them ran in " the same little Noho lesbian social circle " , and spent time together when she returned from her travels .
Wolters had told Kerman she worked for an African drug lord , moving heroin around internationally , while Kerman was fascinated by her globe - trotting , adventurous lifestyle .
Wolters asked Kerman if she wanted to take part in the operation .
According to Wolters , she and Kerman became romantically involved after Kerman had gotten involved in the drug ring .
In her interview with Vanity Fair , Wolters said that they were not girlfriends but friends with benefits , a notion with which Kerman disagreed , stating that they may have different perspectives about their time together and their relationship was complicated .
Kerman traveled with Wolters to exotic places , and made several trips carrying drug - funds for the cartel .
Kerman realized she needed to walk away when Wolters asked her to transport heroin instead of money , after which she flew home and started a new life .
Years later , Kerman was indicted and plead guilty to a money laundering charge , serving 13 months in a minimum - security prison in Danbury , Connecticut .
Wolters was charged with conspiracy to import heroin , serving nearly six years in a Dublin , California prison , and nearly 14 years on parole .
In the series , the issue of whether Vause implicated Chapman and the effect on their personal relationship is a major plot line of the first season .
When Wolters and others involved in the drug ring were arrested by federal law enforcement
, Wolters said that she , like the others , named everyone involved , including Kerman .
Wolters also stated that , contrary to Kerman 's implication in her memoir , she was not " singularly responsible for [ her ] downfall " , as she was honest about what she did and getting involved was Kerman 's decision .
Although Kerman aimed to take responsibility for her actions , she said she still carried some resentment toward Wolters [ for naming her ] , later making peace with her when they were held together in a Chicago facility .
Unlike in the series , Wolters and Kerman did not get back together when they were reunited in prison .
According to Wolters , " the only [ physical ] similarity between myself and [ Vause ] is my black glasses . "
In her memoir , Kerman described Wolters as a " droll " woman , with a " drawling , wisecracking husky voice " and a " playful , watchful way of drawing a person out " ; " when she paid you attention , it felt as if she were about to let you in on a private joke .
" Wolters ' interview to Vanity Fair in April 2014 led to a book deal for her memoir .
In 2015 , HarperOne released Out of Orange , Wolters ' memoir covering from the circumstances of her involvement in the drug trafficking ring and her relationship with Kerman , to her arrest , prison experience , and the present .
STORYLINES
SEASON 1
Section::::Storylines .
Section::::Season 1 .
Vause is introduced in the first episode through flashbacks ; she and Chapman were both involved in crimes involving drug money .
At the end of the first episode , the audience sees that Vause and Chapman are both serving their sentences in the same prison , Litchfield Penitentiary .
The two begin a romantic and sexual relationship in episode six ; they are also both involved in a dispute with another inmate , Tiffany " Pennsatucky " Doggett ( Taryn Manning ) , who locks Vause in a dryer and then attempts to kill Chapman in the season finale .
Vause was raised solely by her mother and , in the ninth episode ' Fucksgiving ' , Vause 's father is seen to be an influence on her being involved in the drug cartel .
When Chapman realises that Vause was the one who told authorities about her illegal drug activities , they break off their relationship .
Vause then becomes sexually involved with another inmate , Nicky Nichols ( Natasha Lyonne ) .
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
In the first episode , Vause promises Chapman that she will lie to protect her in the upcoming trial of her former boss Kubra Balik .
She breaks this promise , however , and , after testifying against Balik , Vause manages to secure release from prison while Chapman remains incarcerated .
After discovering that Balik was not imprisoned for his crimes , Vause fears for her life ; she is also unable to leave her apartment due to the terms of her parole .
She visits Chapman in prison and confides in her that she is scared ; Chapman then gets Bloom to tell Vause 's parole officer that Vause is breaking her parole , which lands her back in prison , where she is safe from Balik 's retribution .
SEASON 3
Section::::Season 3 .
Vause appears in every episode of the third season .
Chapman reports Vause to a parole officer and she is sent back to Litchfield prison ; Chapman does eventually admit to doing this and the two begin frequently having hate sex .
Chapman and Vause reconcile and officially resume their relationship , but become more distant again as the season progresses ; Chapman becomes romantically involved with a new inmate , Stella Carlin ( Ruby Rose ) , and this upsets Vause .
Vause becomes increasingly concerned that Balik has sent someone into the prison to spy on her and bring her harm ; she suspects that this person is Lolly Whitehill ( Lori Petty ) and attacks her in the toilet .
It turns out that Whitehill is completely delusional and thinks that Vause is from the National Security Agency .
In the season finale , Vause is confronted by Balik 's henchman Aydin Bayat and her fate is left ambiguous .
SEASON 4 Section::::Season 4 .
In the first episode , Vause is seen being strangled by Aydin Bayat in the greenhouse , struggling for her life .
She is saved by Lolly Whitehill who kicks him seemingly to death .
However , Vause discovers in the night that he is just barely alive and is forced to suffocate him .
Vause and Whitehill , planning on burying Aydin under the floorboards , discover Frieda Berlin , who has found the body in its temporary hiding place .
Together Vause , Whitehill , and Berlin dismember and bury the body in the garden .
As the season progresses , Whitehill becomes increasingly at risk of blowing their cover .
Meanwhile , Vause is suffering from guilt and lives in constant fear of being caught .
When Berlin suggests poisoning Whitehill , Vause confides in Galina " Red " Reznikov , hoping she will convince Berlin otherwise .
In episode 8 , Vause and Chapman bond again while getting high with Nichols in the garden , and their relationship once again progresses .
Aydin 's body is found in an unwarranted investigation by Desi Piscatella , resulting in Whitehill being sent to psych .
Vause is never questioned about his murder .
Vause 's guilt manifests itself in notes left around the prison , revealing Aydin 's name .
Chapman convinces Vause to find them all , and prepares to burn them .
CRITICAL COMMENTARY Section::::Critical commentary .
Matthew Wolfson of Slant Magazine described Vause as intelligent , " with the instincts of a pragmatist , but without a strategy — a striking and emotionally direct person who may have closed off too many options for a workable future " .
Dana Poccoli of AfterEllen said that Vause could be considered a villain in the first season as she is the reason Chapman is in prison , but she is also a " fascinating character that we want to understand and spend time with . "
Writing in The Daily Beast , Victoria Kezra similarly suggested that before the audience meets her , Vause is already a villain , for she is " responsible for Chapman 's illegal activities " and named her ex - lover to receive less prison time .
What is " wonderful " about the character , Kezra added , is that the audience 's " perception of her changes throughout the show " , from a villainous figure to a sympathetic individual .
She observed that Vause has " a great sense of humor about the whole situation " and is " pretty caring and insightful " .
TV Guides Liz Raftery considered Vause a polarizing character , asking " is she a master manipulator or just misunderstood ? " .
She proposed that Vause " seems to think of herself as a bad person
but maybe she is n't , whereas [ Chapman ] is so convinced that she 's a good person and is totally taken aback whenever anyone challenges that . "
Gerri Mahn of Den of Geek wrote that unlike Chapman , Vause " does n't harbor any illusions about who she is or what playing by the rules will get her " .
Vause had named Chapman in her trial both to receive a lighter sentence and out of resentment from Chapman breaking her heart years earlier ; she sincerely loves Chapman , Mahn considered , and " continually came to her defense throughout season one " , turning her down when she realized Chapman was using her as " someone to fall back on when Larry does n't come through " .
Tim Surette of TV.com said that Vause 's season one flashbacks fit the character well , and " instantly gave us a story to be interested in " , as they provided a more rounded view of the character than Chapman 's purview allowed .
J.M Suarez wrote in PopMatters that the character of Vause is " fearless and intimidating " as well as street - smart , contrary to Chapman who is " sheltered " and " often afraid and deferential " , and it is " in highlighting these differences in prison , that their eventual backstories have even more impact . "
Greco Patti of Vulture complimented Prepon 's " nuanced " portrayal , and noted that , notwithstanding Vause 's illicit occupation and her role in Chapman 's imprisonment , she is a woman who " came from nothing , who loved and lost , and who maybe got used " , and she seems more loyal and genuine in her love for Chapman .
The A.V. Clubs Myles McNutt considered Vause 's relationship with her crimes to be " complicated " ; he appreciates when the show does not filter character development solely through Chapman , deeming it " productive " when Vause had " a chance to open up to Nicky [ Nichols ] " .
McNutt also said that Vause 's conflict with Doggett , who saw her as " coming from privilege " , is meaningful for Vause as it is a trigger for her " past struggles with class hierarchies " .
According to McNutt , Vause 's despondency regarding her absent father " could either gain [ her ] new perspective and put her life on the right track or [ she could ] try to fill the absence as quickly as possible " , the latter of which she chose .
Mahn deliberated that , growing up poor , a free ride was n't a possibility in Vause 's world .
Vause " left her scruples at the door " when she built her worldly life on an alliance through her father 's drug dealer , Mahn assessed . "
She worked hard , gambled big , and lost everything " .
Autostraddle posited that Vause hates and fears vulnerability , and the scene where she is locked in a dryer and pleads Chapman to stay echoes the past , when Vause pleaded with Chapman before Chapman left following news of Vause 's mother 's death .
Additionally , Vause is a complicated character for the writer , primarily because she found her sexual threat to Doggett " troubling " , while seeing Vause as a young girl " who would do anything for the life she was cheated out of " was something with which she empathized .
In Den of Geek , Chris Longo wrote that , as the first season played out , Vause " was vilified , then the tables turned when she won Piper 's friendship , then they turned upside down during their inevitable hookup .
Alex , for all the bad she 's done , seems like a woman who stays true to her word .
And now after breaking Alex 's ( and Larry 's ) heart , Piper is the one who 's vilified . "
Longo praised Prepon 's performance , and hoped the series progressed Vause 's storylines .
The Guardians Tom Meltzer wrote that Prepon plays Chapman 's " jilted " former lover " with subtlety and unabashed smoulder " .
In his review of the first season , Matthew Gilbert of The Boston Globe described pre - prison Vause as " icy cool " , and called Prepon a " revelation " in the role .
David Hiltbrand wrote in The Philadelphia Inquirer that Prepon plays the character with " real vigor " .
Maureen Ryan of HuffPost also praised Prepon 's portrayal , commenting that " underneath the cool - girl exterior is a whole lot of pain and loneliness , and Prepon has done a wonderful job of subtly bringing those notes forward . "
Chris Jancelewicz of The Huffington Post Canada deemed Vause " charismatic " , adding that Prepon " excels as the bad girl influence " .
Kristi Turnquist of The Oregonian stated that although Vause would only be present in a few episodes of the second season , she " turns up to devastating effect early on " .
In a review of the first episode of season two , Horatia Harrod of The Daily Telegraph commented that Vause is dedicated to self - preservation and thought that " another betrayal " of Chapman " reached new depths " , thus she found it " puzzling " that Vause 's bad - girl routine " seems to have won her a fan following , while [ Chapman ] is reviled . "
Kevin Fallon of The Daily Beast noted that there is something about Vause that " convinces [ Chapman ] to throw her lifelong caution to the wind .
"
Kate Zernike of The New York Times said that Vause is " calculating " and that " there 's something black cat - like about [ her ] – she slips into the frame
and you know things are about to go bad , or at least , get interesting .
"
Chris Harvey of The Daily Telegraph described Prepon 's turn as " unforgettable " and explained that Vause 's wicked attitude and bespectacled look have made the character a " cult favourite " .
In her review of the season two premiere , The Wall Street Journals Candace Jackson wrote that " much like in Piper Kerman 's real - life experience , [ the Chicago facility ] is where [ Chapman ] runs into Vause " .
Prepon is " excellent in this role as ever " , Jackson commended , walking a " believable line between flirtation and manipulation " .
Spencer Kornhaber of The Atlantic observed that Vause was " correct earlier in [ the second season 's premiere ] when she diagnosed how inconsistent Chapman 's worldview is : "
it is so hard to keep up with what is black and white for you " . "
According to Kornhaber , Vause 's " return , in letter and in flashback , offers another lesson in moral relativity and personal transformation .
We finally see how [ Chapman 's ] cultivated naivety and [ Vause 's ] cultivated knowingness created a passionate , dangerous pairing early on . "
Danielle Henderson remarked in Vulture that Vause " has balls " for sending Chapman letters after the incident in the season two premiere .
In her review of the second season 's finale , Zernike wrote that although Vause may not be the " typical re - entering felon " , her speech to Chapman about needing to violate her probation , flee , and possibly go back to her former felonious life , " does raise some good points " regarding issues with the prison system .
The Advocates Nico Lang described Vause as a notably popular femme fatale character , whom the show brought back after the second season " despite the fact that the real - life character was barely in [ Kerman 's memoir ] at all " .
Charlotte Richardson Andrews wrote in Sight & Sound that Vause is one of the show 's " believable and investment - worthy " queer characters , adding that the " tangled , romantic dance that [ Vause and Chapman ] do is compelling , nuanced and sexy where , in other hands , it might have felt exploitative " .
In Digital Spy , Emma Dibdin described a " power shift " in the third season between Vause and Chapman and how this positively impacts both characters ; " the power dynamic of [ Chapman ] and
[ Vause 's ] relationship is so dramatically shifted that everything about them feels fresh .
[ Vause ] is more vulnerable than we 've ever seen her , utterly shattered to find herself back in jail .
" The Observers Orly Greenberg said Vause returns to Litchfield " completely absent of her flashing eyes and snarky confidence , instead relying on [ Chapman ] as an almost maternal figure " as Chapman leads Vause to believe her return to prison is a product of " the system " , rather than Chapman 's own doing .
Emily Ambash of CutPrintFilm wrote that Vause is " emotionally broken " when she reenters prison ; " embarrassed and ashamed of her own choices " and her failure in handling her brief freedom .
Vause and Chapman 's dynamic in the third season feels " fresh " , different from the first season , as they confront their issues in the present without passive aggressiveness and without a focus on the past , Ambash noted ; " the characters [ are forced to ] question their faith not just in each other but also in themselves when dealing with each other . "
Michael Hindle of Comingsoon.net observed of Vause and Chapman 's relationship , while " one has always had power over the other in some form or another now [ Vause and Chapman ] are more or less on an even playing field " .
Joshua Alston of The A.V. Club said that Vause 's return to prison " lands with a surprisingly soft impact " .
The character Stella " appears right on time to drive a wedge between [ Chapman ] and [ Vause ] just as a functional relationship becomes possible " , and the show " manages to make [ the looming love triangle ] feel consequential . "
In her review of the third season , Jessica Kiang of Indiewire wrote that Vause and Chapman " come spectacularly together but find , again with some insight , that they 're a couple whose fire can burn on hate much easier than on routine .
"
Libby Hill argued in her The New York Times review of the season 's second episode , that the Vause and Chapman relationship has become " toxic " .
The on - off lovers have " little meaningful interaction " with other characters while they are entangled in their tempestuous relationship , making them " emotionally unavailable " to other characters and to the audience .
Hill hopes Vause is more integrated into " Litchfield 's culture " and has more humanizing interactions with other characters as she did with Nichols in the first season .
In reviewing the season 's second episode , The A.V. Clubs Myles McNutt said that although he understands the attraction of Chapman and Vause and the significance of their intertwined story playing out in prison , their present storyline compels them to exist " independently of anything around them " , removing them from ordinary life in the prison community of Litchfield .
Perri Nemiroff of Collider felt that it was " an unexpected and unearned twist " that Vause would reconnect with Chapman ( through " hate sex " ) soon after finding out Chapman was responsible for her being back in prison .
Their role play in the prison 's drama class , however , " balances the palpable hostility with humor and heart , making the scene wildly entertaining , but also ensuring that the moment really means something , too . "
In Entertainment Weekly , Jonathan Dornbush wrote that Vause and Chapman engaging in angry sex after the latter 's hand in taking away her freedom is " another shift in their power dynamic " .
According to Dornbush , this occurs because Vause is " taking control after Piper took it away from her " ; " She 's still in jail , she 's still lost her life on the outside , and she may be in more danger now than ever " , Dornbush explained , " but at least she can control something . "
Ambash said that the drama class improv exercise is necessary as it compels Vause and Chapman " to consider their real - life situation " and " find a sort of reconciliation " .
Keith Nelson Jr. of Digital Trends found Vause 's speech to correctional officer Rogers , on the malleable and interpretive nature of morality , to be frank " societal commentary " .
Sarah Bredeman of FanSided opined that the commentary Vause made to Rogers is " one of the best ' we are not your salvation , you ca n't save us , and this ai n't no
Dead Poet 's Society kinda situation ' speeches " , and " it really hits home a good point . "
Kelly Lawler in USA
Today suggested that , as opposed to how Chapman painted her , Vause 's legitimate concerns over the danger she is in makes her one of the most rational individuals on the show .
Perri Nemiroff of Collider said that Vause 's season three flashbacks on her witnessing what her drug cartel boss is capable of made her present situation " far more dynamic and tense " , giving her anxiety full credibility .
Alan Sepinwall of Uproxx felt that Vause 's flashback , like Nichols ' in an earlier episode , was " covering familiar territory solely to support prominent stories each was getting in the present " , but at least both flashbacks were " somber " enough to make them an " interesting contrast " to the concurrent comedic moments at Litchfield .
In his review of the eleventh episode of the season , McNutt wrote that Vause 's " isolation is turned around , and what once felt like a failure of the show 's writing becomes a logical character choice .
"
Vause wants no part in what Chapman 's prison business has turned into , knowing first - hand the dangers and the damage such an operation can cause .
" I find myself respecting [ Vause 's ] struggle to embrace her situation — it may not have served the season to this point , " McNutt observed , " but it serves here as a productive counterpoint to [ Chapman ] " .
According to Ambash , Vause [ and Chapman 's ] notable absence from the third season 's final group scenes – as Vause is trapped with the man who has been sent to kill her , and Chapman is off tattooing herself in the chapel – symbolizes their heightened distrust in others and the prison system itself . "
For [ Vause ] , unlike [ Chapman ] , this was n't her choice .
With safety stripped from her , and ties of trust cut by others , it 's no surprise [ Vause ] is kept away now from the freedom of the lake . "
Ambash noted that Vause 's season three storyline " highlights real issues regarding prisoners ' safety , especially when no real background checks are performed on new , untrained officers , who end up with easy access to inmates " .
Moreover , " it serves as a reminder that [ Vause and Chapman ] have basically switched roles " as Chapman embarked on " the smuggling business [ and ] showed little regard for [ Vause ] " , finding a new sense of power and thrill in her illicit enterprise , while Vause wisely avoided it .
Lauren Chval of Chicago Tribune remarked that what is great about Vause is " she knows who she is and what she wants " , trusts her instincts and has " never flipped on her feelings for Chapman " .
Chval praised Prepon in the role , and remarked that Vause is " always more interesting in her scenes without Chapman " .
Perri Nemiroff of Collider said Prepon has been successful " taking Alex from a strong inmate you do n't want to mess with to someone super vulnerable who 's fearing for her life . "
Rick Porter of The Hollywood Reporter praised Prepon 's performance as Vause , in the season finale , encounters the hitman sent to kill her , writing , " Prepon sells the heck of out Alex 's disbelief and fear in the scene . "
The aftermath of Vause 's storyline has a sweeping effect throughout the fourth season according to critics .
In Harper 's Bazaar , Emma Dibdin wrote that Vause having to kill , dismember , and bury her would - be murderer was " the beginning of a season that saw almost every one of our beloved inmates go through her darkest hour yet . "
According to Kayla Kumari Upadhyaya of Autostraddle , Vause and Lolly 's " greenhouse murder " became one of the " most suspenseful through lines " of the season .
Isabel Mohan wrote in The Daily Telegraph that Vause 's confidence from previous seasons is gone as she has become " a nervous wreck " and " her scenes are among the most macabre " of the season .
The Atlantics Spencer Kornhaber considered Vause 's " saga " to be some of series ' " darkest scenes yet . "
Several themes explored in the season are evoked in Vause 's storyline .
Jen Chaney of Vulture noted that the " murky issues surrounding blame " are prompted from the outset of the season , as both Vause and Lolly become responsible for the homicide of the hit man , " yet neither of them are true ' murderers ' in that both were motivated by self - defense .
It 's a case of both women doing wrong and neither of them doing wrong . "
Kornhaber of The Atlantic said that Vause 's acknowledgement that her attacker " was a person " , echoed " a mantra that 's surfaced in various forms across the season " .
Myles McNutt of The A.V. Club wrote , " the season has been consumed by the idea of guilt " and it manifests on Vause and Chapman 's attitudes and behavior ; in a latter episode , they decide " they are n't willing to do anything that would add to their sense of guilt " .
Vultures Kathryn VanArendonk observed the notion that " regret is real , but time only moves in one direction " reflected on Vause and Chapman 's conversation about changing the past , and the need to claim selfhood in Vause wanting to acknowledge the humanity of her attacker .
Myles McNutt wrote that Vause being compelled to finish killing the man , instead of letting him die by Lolly 's deed , " makes it more visceral , and creates an internalized event to frame her understanding of her status as a ' criminal ' in the season to follow . "
Hannah Shaw - Williams of Screen Rant regarded Vause taking the life of her attacker as " one of the premiere 's most emotionally powerful scenes , which reveals that despite her background as a hard - as - nails heroin dealer , Vause has never actually had to kill anyone before . "
In Paste magazine , Matt Brennan commended " the quiet , tearful moment in which [ Vause ] ...
decides to end his life . "
" Her remorse " , Brennan noted , " for this choice , and for all the choices that led to it , is palpable , even if his death amounts to self - defense . "
Emma Dibdin wrote in Digital Spy that while Vause 's on - off lover Chapman " [ insists ] she 's a force to be reckoned with " , Vause " goes through the real moral transformation , pushed to brutal extremes by the hitman sent to kill her . "
Kayla Kumari Upadhyaya of Autostraddle considered the scenes of Vause helping Lolly reconcile her thoughts and emotions "
a cutting and intimate look at self - care and coping mechanisms .
"
The Atlantics Spencer Kornhaber similarly reviewed Vause 's " counseling " of Lolly , finding it a " succinct and touching glimpse at post - traumatic coping " .
McNutt opined in The A.V. Club that the circumstances of Lolly 's paranoia , the lack of evidence that the correctional officer was a hit man , the lack of trust in a broken system , and the difficulty in explaining away Vause and Lolly 's actions in the homicide , meant that Lolly being taken away was " tragic " but ultimately " probably the best case scenario " when someone would have to be held responsible .
Autostraddle Kayla Kumari Upadhyaya considered Vause 's decision to not tell Chapman what she has gone through an " emotionally significant " moment for the character .
Vause is not on good terms with Chapman , but she also does not want Chapman to be implicated by it , Upadhyaya observed .
According to Upadhyaya , apart from it being an overarching plot , the homicide has also had " long - term emotional significance " for Vause .
Ed Power of The Telegraph found it " wrenching " to see Vause " haunted by doubt and guilt " , praising the show for " peeling back the layers , showing a new side to a person we thought we already knew " and the " disquiet and disbelief that flashed across [ Vause 's ] face " in response to Chapman in the crack scene .
Alan Sepinwall of Uproxx wrote that Vause and Chapman needing to be under the influence of drugs " to finally be honest with each other about all their recent tragedies seemed about right for a relationship that 's always thrived on a high level of drama .
" In her review of the season 's ninth episode , Pilot Viruet of Decider remarked that it is " good to see [ Vause and Chapman ] getting along and not plagued by relationship dramatics . " In his review of the season 's finale , McNutt wrote that he found Vause " reacting to death by thinking about the hitman 's humanity rang true to her arc " .
Prepon received praise for her performance in the fourth season .
Dana Schwartzof of The Observer lauded Prepon in the premiere episode writing that her performance should be up for Emmy consideration .
Kayla Kumari Upadhyaya of Autostraddle wrote that Prepon is " giving her best performance to date on the show , effectively capturing the turmoil of Alex 's mind and the psychological toll of this secret . "
Prepon won the Satellite Award for Best Supporting Actress – Series , Miniseries or Television Film at the 18th Satellite Awards for her performance as Vause .
SEE ALSO
* List of Orange Is the New Black characters
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Alex Vause on IMDb