DEATH OF A BACHELOR Death of a Bachelor is the fifth studio album by American rock band Panic !
at the Disco , released January 15 , 2016 on Fueled by Ramen and DCD2 .
It is the follow - up to the band 's fourth studio album , Too Weird to Live ,
Too Rare to Die !
( 2013 ) , with the entire album written and recorded by vocalist / multi - instrumentalist Brendon Urie , among external writers .
It is the band 's first album to not feature drummer Spencer Smith and also follows bassist Dallon Weekes ' departure from the official line - up , subsequently becoming a touring member once again .
Death of a Bachelor debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 , with 190,000 album units , earning the band its best sales week and first number one album .
The album has been certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for sales of at least 1,000,000 copies .
It was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Rock Album at the 59th Annual Grammy Awards .
WRITING AND COMPOSITION Section::::Writing and composition .
In an interview with Entertainment Tonight , Urie stated that Death of a Bachelor was lyrically inspired by his wife Sarah Urie and his lifestyle , stating : " This whole album was written at my house where she and I live and it reflects very much the lifestyle I was living [ while writing it ] , which is so different from who I used to be . "
In an interview with Alt 98.7 mid-2015 , he had to say about the album : " It 's going to be a little bit different , it 's this mix between Sinatra and Queen , if that makes any sense ...
Every time we do a new album , for me , it 's always evolving and changing — in the best way .
There 's going to be a new energy live . "
In April 2015 , Urie began recording Death of a Bachelor .
A small studio had been built and a piano was bought specifically for the album 's production .
Production was handled by Jake Sinclair and Urie .
Sinclair , who is a friend of Urie 's , helped him view the music in " different ways " .
Urie said he " loved " working in the studio , often running between that and the piano .
He played every instrument minus the horns , which he also " love[d ] " .
His views had " all changed from [ Too Weird to Live , Too Rare to Die ! ]
" , having " different things " he wanted to discuss .
On October 22 , 2015
Brendon Urie released a statement through the band 's Facebook page on the background of the album :
On January 6 , 2016 in an interview with Mixdown Magazine , Urie commented on bassist Dallon Weekes ' move from the official lineup .
On the day of the titular track 's premiere Brendon Urie said on social media :
Urie also stated in an interview with Upset Magazine that he feels that the song is " very jazzy , very Sinatra esque ..
but then put it with this beat that sounds like Beyoncé 's Drunk in Love " .
The song is also where Urie got the album title from .
Only one song was cut from the album , " Night Birds " described as a " ...
Driving arena - rocker with a flashy guitar solo " .
Urie described the song as " A little too early Butch Walker , but definitely not as good " in an interview with Alternative Press RELEASE Section::::Release .
" Hallelujah " was released as the lead single on April 20 , 2015 and serviced to alternative radio .
A lyric video was uploaded on the same day and the official music video premiered on July 7 , 2015 . "
Death of a Bachelor " was premiered on Beats 1 on Apple Music by Pete Wentz on September 1 , 2015 .
" Victorious " , co - written and produced by CJ Baran , was released for digital download on September 29 , 2015 as the second single from the album " Emperor 's New Clothes " and its music video was released for digital download on October 21 , 2015 as the third official single to coincide with the album 's announcement .
The official music video for " Death of a Bachelor " was released on YouTube on December 24 , 2015 .
On December 31 , 2015 , the band made " Do n't Threaten Me with a Good Time " available for streaming .
On January 15 , 2016 , the band premiered the rest of its tracks on its YouTube channel at the same time the album was released .
The band went on the Weezer & Panic !
at the Disco Summer Tour 2016 with Weezer to promote both of their new albums .
On September 22 , 2016 , the official music video for LA Devotee was released on the band 's YouTube channel to coincide with the announcement of the Death of a Bachelor Tour .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Death of a Bachelor has received generally positive reviews from music critics .
It holds an average score of 69/100 on Metacritic , indicating " generally favorable reviews .
" In a positive review , The New York Times commented on the album 's second single , " Victorious " , writing that " [ Urie ] evokes both the flamboyant swagger of Queen and the mechanized gleam of Daft Punk " .
Evan Lucy in Alternative Press writing , " For all of its precocious , borderline bratty moments , Death of a Bachelor is a remarkably nuanced affair ...
it 's hard not to break out in goosebumps and marvel at the moving songwriting . "
Conversely , The Guardian called the album " hollow and shapeless " , also stating that " Urie affects a Vegas croon , indicating a desire to reinvent himself as an edgy Michael Bublé " , and how " it 's unlikely to pay off " .
Q Magazine wrote , " It 's a confusing affair , where [ Urie ] foolishly tries to croon like Frank Sinatra on the title track and never quite nails down whatever the big idea was supposed to be .
Still , there are moments to cherish . "
AbsolutePunk writer Aaron Mook scored the album a 6/10 , noting , " It 's been a while since I 've heard an album that 's so divisive in its quality , so manic on one end and so lazy on the other .
"
Consequence of Sound panned the songs
" Do n't Threaten Me With a Good Time " and " Crazy = Genius " , stating that " [ ' Do n't Threaten Me With a Good Time ' ]
lazily squashes together a sample of the B-52s ' " Rock Lobster " with lackluster lyrics ( " Who are these people/
I just woke up in my underwear " ) out of tune with their surroundings " and that " ' Crazy = Genius' ... only serves to remind of how many days have gone by and stand in the way of any musical progress " .
COMMERCIAL PERFORMANCE Section::::Commercial performance .
The album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 , with 190,000 album - equivalent units .
It also earned Panic !
at the Disco its best sales week yet for an album , as it sold 169,000 in pure album sales .
In its second week , the album fell to number 5 on the Billboard 200 while selling 39,000 equivalent album units ( down 79 percent ) .
It was the twelfth best - selling album of 2016 with 506,000 copies sold , which also made it the second best selling rock album of 2016 .
Including streams and tracks sales , the album has totaled 845,000 units in the United States in 2016 .
The album was also certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for combined sales and album - equivalent units of over a million units in the United States .
TRACK LISTING
Section::::Track listing .
Songwriting credits per booklet .
Notes * signifies an additional producer .
PERSONNEL Section::::Personnel .
Adapted from the album booklet .
Panic !
at the Disco * Brendon Urie – vocals , guitar , bass , keyboards , drums except for " Hallelujah " , background vocals on " Hallelujah " , creative and art direction Additional musicians and production * Rob Mathes – horn arrangement , conductor * Andy Snitzer –
tenor saxophone *
Dave Mann – tenor saxophone
* Aaron Heick – alto
saxophone
* Dave Riekenberg – baritone saxophone *
Mike Davis – tenor trombone
* Randy Andos – bass trombone
* Jeff Kievit – trumpet
* Tony Kadleck – trumpet on " Death of a Bachelor " , " Crazy = Genius " , " LA Devotee " , " Golden Days " and " Impossible Year " ; flugelhorn * Dylan Schwab – trumpet on " Victorious " , " The Good , the Bad and the Dirty " and " House of Memories " * White Sea – background vocals on " Victorious " , " Hallelujah " , additional production on " LA Devotee " and " House of Memories " * Mark Stepro – drums on " Hallelujah " * Nicole Guice – creative and art direction * Zack Cloud Hall – cover photography
* Shervin Lainez – portrait photography
* The Visual Strategist – layout * Jake Sinclair – producer on all tracks , background vocals on " Victorious " , " Hallelujah " * JR Rotem – producer on " Do n't Threaten Me with a Good Time " * Imad Royal – producer on " Hallelujah " * Suzy Shinn – additional production on " Victorious " , " Death of a Bachelor " , " Crazy = Genius " , " LA Devotee " , " Golden Days " and " The Good , the Bad and the Dirty " , engineer , background vocals on " Victorious " , " Death of a Bachelor " , " Crazy = Genius " , " LA Devotee " , " Golden Days " and " The Good , the Bad and the Dirty " * Claudius Mittendorfer – mixing on all songs except " Hallelujah " * Michael Brauer – mixing on " Hallelujah " * Pete Lyman – mastering on all songs except " Hallelujah " * Joe LaPorta – mastering on " Hallelujah " CHARTS WEEKLY CHARTS Section::::Charts .
Section::::Weekly charts . ! scope="col " Chart ( 2016 ) ! scope="col " Peak position !
scope="row " Norwegian Albums ( VG - lista ) ! scope="row " US Vinyl Albums ( Billboard ) YEAR - END CHARTS Section::::Year - end charts .
!
scope="col " Chart ( 2016 ) ! scope="col " Position ! scope="row " Australian Albums ( ARIA ) ! scope="row " UK Albums ( OCC ) !
scope="row " US Billboard 200 !
scope="row " US Billboard Top Rock Albums !
scope="col " Chart ( 2017 ) ! scope="col " Position !
scope="row " US Billboard 200 !
scope="row " US Billboard Top Rock Albums !
scope="col " Chart ( 2018 ) ! scope="col " Position !
scope="row " US Billboard 200 !
scope="row
" US Billboard Top Rock Albums CERTIFICATIONS
SEE ALSO
* List of Billboard 200 number - one albums of 2016
* Weezer & Panic !
at the Disco Summer Tour 2016 * Death of a Bachelor Tour REFERENCES