VEGAS GOLDEN KNIGHTS
The Vegas Golden Knights are a professional ice hockey team based in the Las Vegas metropolitan area that began play in the 2017–18 NHL season .
They are members of the Pacific Division of the Western Conference of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) .
The team is owned by Black Knight Sports & Entertainment , a consortium led by Bill Foley and the Maloof family .
The team plays its home games at T - Mobile Arena on the Las Vegas Strip in Paradise , Nevada .
HISTORY BACKGROUND AND ESTABLISHMENT Section::::History .
Section::::Background and establishment .
The NHL has had a presence in Las Vegas since 1991 ; that year , the city hosted the first outdoor game between two NHL teams – a preseason exhibition between the Los Angeles Kings and New York Rangers outside Caesars Palace .
The Kings would subsequently organize " Frozen Fury " – a series of annual preseason games in Las Vegas against the Colorado Avalanche .
The NHL Awards ceremonies have been held in Las Vegas since 2009 .
In 2009 , the media speculated about a plan involving Hollywood producer Jerry Bruckheimer to move the Phoenix Coyotes to Nevada .
Rumors of a Las Vegas expansion team surfaced again in August 2014 , pointing to a new indoor arena on the Strip ( built as a joint venture between Anschutz Entertainment Group , owners of the Los Angeles Kings , and MGM Resorts International ) as the potential home arena , although these rumors were denied by the league .
In November 2014 , an unconfirmed report stated that the league had selected billionaire businessman Bill Foley and the Maloof family ( former owners of the National Basketball Association 's Sacramento Kings , and founders of the Palms Casino Resort ) to lead the ownership group for a Las Vegas expansion team .
In December 2014 , the NHL 's board of governors decided to allow Foley to hold a season ticket drive to gauge interest in a Las Vegas team , though league commissioner Gary Bettman also warned the media to " [ not ] make more out of this than it is " .
The season ticket drive began in February 2015 , with interested parties placing ten percent deposits for the 2016–17 season .
The drive drew 5,000 deposits in its first day and a half , and reached its goal of 10,000 deposits by April 2015 .
In June 2015 , the league officially opened the window for prospective owners to bid on expansion teams .
By this point , Foley had secured more than 13,200 season - ticket deposits .
Two expansion applications were submitted : Foley 's application for a Las Vegas team , and a bid from Quebecor to revive the Quebec Nordiques at a new arena in Quebec City .
Both Las Vegas and Quebec were invited to move into Phase II of the league expansion bid in August 2015 , and subsequently advanced to Phase III .
At the league owners ' meeting on June 22 , 2016 , in Las Vegas , the Las Vegas expansion bid was approved by a unanimous vote , with play to begin in the 2017–18 NHL season .
The team became the first major professional sports franchise to be based in Las Vegas , and the first NHL expansion team since 2000 .
Foley committed to pay the league 's $ 500 million expansion fee and began the process of hiring the team 's principal staff and determining its official identity .
Foley announced that former Washington Capitals general manager George McPhee would be the franchise 's first general manager .
On November 22 , 2016 , the name was revealed as the Vegas Golden Knights .
START OF OPERATIONS :
2017–PRESENT Section::::Start of operations : 2017–present .
On March 1 , 2017 ( coinciding with the league 's trade deadline ) , the team completed its expansion fee payments and filings , making it eligible to formally begin operations such as free agent acquisition , and participation in league meetings .
Five days later , the Golden Knights made their first personnel move by signing Reid Duke to a three - year entry - level contract .
The team announced inaugural head coach Gerard Gallant on April 13 , 2017 .
Over the next two months , the Golden Knights developed their farm system , announcing affiliations with the Chicago Wolves of the American Hockey League and the Quad City Mallards of the ECHL .
The team participated in the 2017 NHL Expansion Draft on June 21 , 2017 , selecting an available player from all 30 teams in the NHL .
The draft picks were announced at T - Mobile Arena during the NHL Awards ceremony .
Some notable selections included goalie Marc - Andre Fleury from the Pittsburgh Penguins and winger James Neal from the Nashville Predators .
At the 2017 NHL Entry Draft , Cody Glass was the first player selected by the Golden Knights .
The Golden Knights played their first game on October 6 against the Dallas Stars with Neal scoring the franchise 's first two goals en route to their first victory .
The team 's inaugural home game was played on October 10 , 2017 , hosting the Arizona Coyotes as the second game of a home - and - home series .
In the aftermath of the October 1 mass shooting , the pre - game ceremonies honored the victims of the attack , and the team issued an appeal for donations to its charitable arm .
With their 5–2 win , the Golden Knights increased their unbeaten streak to start the season to 3–0 , an NHL record for an expansion team .
The Golden Knights are the first team in NHL history to have started their inaugural season winning eight of their first nine games .
During their tenth game , goaltender Oscar Dansk was injured becoming the third Golden Knights ' goaltender to be injured during the season after losing starters Fleury and the recently acquired Malcolm Subban , forcing the team to start a fourth goaltender in 11 games with Maxime Lagace .
Fifteen games into the season , Vadim Shipachyov became the first player to retire from the NHL as a Golden Knight when he decided to return to the Kontinental Hockey League .
In December , the Golden Knights set another NHL expansion team record of six straight wins , a record they had previously missed when they lost their tenth game of the season , and established a new NHL record with eight straight wins .
On February 1 , 2018 , the Golden Knights set the expansion team record for wins in a debut season with 34 wins after only 50 games , and then on February 21 , 2018 , set a record for most points by an expansion team in the inaugural season with 84 .
Clinching a berth for the 2018 playoffs on March 26 , the Golden Knights became the first team since the Edmonton Oilers and Hartford Whalers in the 1979–80 season to make the playoffs in their inaugural season in the league .
On March 31 , the Knights clinched the Pacific Division title , becoming the first true expansion team in the four major sports to win its division in its inaugural season ( not counting all - expansion divisions , as was the case in the 1967–68 season ) .
They had led the Pacific since December 23 .
On April 11 , the franchise won its first playoff game in a 1–0 victory over the Los Angeles Kings in the first game of the series .
Six days later on April 17 , the franchise earned their first playoff series win against the Kings , winning the fourth game by a 1–0 score , which also became their first playoff series sweep .
The Knights became the first team in NHL history to sweep their first playoff series in their inaugural season .
On May 6 , 2018 , the Golden Knights defeated the San Jose Sharks four - games - to - two , becoming the third team in NHL history to win multiple playoff series in their inaugural season , and advanced to the Western Conference Finals .
On May 20 , Vegas defeated the Winnipeg Jets to win the Western Conference Finals in five games , becoming the third NHL team to advance to the Stanley Cup Finals in its inaugural season , after the Toronto Arenas in 1918 and the St. Louis Blues in 1968 .
The Golden Knights would lose the Stanley Cup Finals to the Washington Capitals in five games .
TEAM
IDENTITY LOGOS , COLORS , AND UNIFORMS
Section::::Team identity .
Section::::Logos , colors , and uniforms .
The team 's primary logo is a barbute helmet , superimposed on a black and gold seal , with a V - shaped opening .
The secondary logo is two crossing swords behind a red star , designed to resemble the star found on the landmark Welcome to Fabulous Las Vegas sign .
The team 's primary color is steel gray , which is said to represent " strength and durability " .
The other team colors are gold , red ( found in the Las Vegas skyline and at Red Rock Canyon ) , and black ( for " power and intensity " ) .
The first uniforms in Golden Knights team history were unveiled publicly on June 20 , 2017 .
NAME Section::::Name .
The team 's name includes " Knights " as a homage to the Black Knights of the United States Military Academy , Foley 's alma mater , and because knights were , according to Foley , " the epitome of the warrior class " .
Foley had hoped to name his team the Black Knights , but dropped that plan after encountering resistance from federal officials .
Foley was unable to call the team the " Vegas Knights " due to the London Knights owning the " Knights " name in Canada .
" Golden " was included in the name because gold is , as Foley stated , the " No . 1 precious metal " , and because Nevada is the largest gold - producing state in the country .
" Las " was omitted from the team 's name because , according to Foley , residents tend to refer to the city simply as " Vegas " , and because a four - word name would have been too long .
The United States Army opposed the team 's trademark registration because their exhibition parachute team uses the same nickname ; they dropped their opposition after negotiating a trademark coexistence agreement with the team .
An objection was also raised by the College of Saint Rose because its sports teams use the same name ; the Vegas team 's initial trademark application was denied as a result , but was later approved on appeal .
The team did clear the name with Clarkson University , which also uses the name Golden Knights .
MASCOT
Section::::Mascot .
The Golden Knights ' mascot is a Gila monster named Chance .
He was unveiled at the team 's second home game on October 13 , 2017 .
The team opted against using a knight for a mascot because it found that knight mascots used by other teams were not very child - friendly .
TEAM
INFORMATION
BROADCASTING TELEVISION Section::::Team information .
Section::::Broadcasting .
Section::::Television .
AT&T SportsNet Rocky Mountain is the regional television rightsholder for all Golden Knights games not broadcast nationally by NBCSN or NBC .
The team 's designated market includes Nevada , Idaho , Montana , Utah , Wyoming , and parts of Arizona and California .
Golden Knights games on AT&T SportsNet are called by former Boston Bruins radio announcer Dave Goucher on play - by - play , and Shane Hnidy , who previously worked color for the Winnipeg Jets on TSN .
RADIO Section::::Radio .
The team has a three - year radio deal with Lotus Broadcasting .
Lotus airs the team 's games on its Fox Sports Radio affiliate , KRLV 1340/98.9 .
KRLV fronts a network of nine stations across Nevada , California , Arizona , and Utah .
One game a week is also aired on the company 's ESPN Deportes Radio affiliate , KENO 1460 , making the team one of only three in the NHL to offer Spanish - language broadcasts .
MINOR LEAGUE AFFILIATE Section::::Minor league affiliate .
On May 16 , 2017 , the Golden Knights entered a multi - year affiliation agreement with a minor league team , the Chicago Wolves of the American Hockey League .
Like most NHL - AHL affiliation arrangements , the Golden Knights are able to transfer players to and from the Wolves .
Although the Wolves are the Golden Knights affiliate , the two teams do not share the same ownership .
In addition to the Wolves , the Golden Knights were affiliated with the Quad City Mallards of the ECHL for the 2017–18 season , however , the Mallards ceased operations after the one season .
On August 21 , 2018 , the Golden Knights entered a one - year affiliation agreement with the Fort Wayne Komets of the ECHL for the 2018–19 season .
SEASON - BY - SEASON RECORD
Section::::Season - by - season record .
This is a complete list of the seasons completed by the Golden Knights .
For the full season - by - season history , see List of Vegas Golden Knights seasons .
GP =
Games played , W = Wins , L = Losses , T
= Ties , OTL = Overtime Losses , Pts = Points , GF = Goals for , GA = Goals against PLAYERS AND PERSONNEL CURRENT ROSTER HEAD COACHES
* Gerard Gallant ( 2017–present ) GENERAL
MANAGERS
* George McPhee ( 2016–present ) OTHER PERSONNEL * Vaughn Karpan ( 2016–present ) , Director of player personnel
* Bob Lowes ( 2016–present ) , Assistant director of player personnel TEAM AND LEAGUE HONORS AWARDS AND TROPHIES Section::::Team and league honors .
Section::::Awards and trophies .
Clarence S. Campbell Bowl
* 2017–18 Jack Adams Award
* Gerard Gallant :
2017–18
Lady Byng Memorial Trophy
* William Karlsson :
2017–18 Mark Messier Leadership Award
* Deryk Engelland :
2017–18 NHL General Manager of the Year Award * George McPhee :
2017–18 FIRST - ROUND DRAFT PICKS
* 2017 : Cody Glass ( 6th overall ) * 2017 : Nick Suzuki ( 13th overall ) * 2017 :
Erik Brannstrom ( 15th overall ) RETIRED NUMBERS Section::::Retired numbers .
The number 58 was retired by the team on March 31 , 2018 , in honor of the 58 victims killed in the October 2017 Las Vegas shooting .
The team is also not able to issue the jersey number 99 to any of its players as it was retired league - wide in honor of Wayne Gretzky at the 2000 NHL All - Star Game RECORDS REGULAR SEASON SCORING LEADERS Section::::Records .
Section::::Regular season scoring leaders .
These are the top - ten point - scorers in franchise history .
Figures are updated after each completed NHL regular season .
* – current Golden Knights player
INDIVIDUAL
* Most goals in a season : William Karlsson , 43 ( 2017–18 ) *
Most assists in a season : David Perron , 50 ( 2017–18 ) * Most points in a season : William Karlsson , 78 ( 2017–18 )
* Most points in a season , defenseman : Colin Miller , 41 ( 2017–18 ) *
Most points in a season , rookie :
Alex Tuch , 37 ( 2017–18 ) *
Most penalty minutes in a season :
Colin Miller , 53 ( 2017–18 ) * Best + /-
in a season : William Karlsson , 49 ( 2017 - 18 )
*
Most wins in a season :
Marc - Andre Fleury , 29 ( 2017 - 18 )
* Most shutouts in a season : Marc - André Fleury , 4 ( 2017–18 )
* Lowest GAA in a season ( min 30 GP ) :
Marc - André Fleury , 2.25 ( 2017–18 ) * Best SV% in a season ( min 30 GP ) :
Marc - André Fleury ,
.927
( 2017–18 ) SEE ALSO
* City National Arena
* List of NHL players
* List of NHL seasons * Las Vegas Wranglers
* Las Vegas Thunder REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS