BERLIN STATION ( TV SERIES )
Berlin Station is an American drama television series created by Olen Steinhauer .
The series stars Richard Armitage , Rhys Ifans , Leland Orser , Michelle Forbes , and Richard Jenkins .
Bradford Winters has been the showrunner since its launch , with Jason Horwitch taking over as showrunner for season 3 .
A ten - episode first season premiered on Epix on October 16 , 2016 .
On November 17 , 2016 , Epix renewed Berlin Station for a second season , originally planned to contain ten episodes , which premiered on October 15 , 2017 and concluded a nine - episode - season - run on December 3 , 2017 .
On December 6 , 2017 , Epix renewed the series for a third season , which premiered on December 2 , 2018 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The story follows Daniel Miller ( Richard Armitage ) , who has just arrived at the CIA foreign station in Berlin , Germany .
In season 1 , Miller has a clandestine mission : to uncover the source of a leak who has supplied information to a now - famous whistleblower named Thomas Shaw .
Guided by veteran Hector DeJean ( Rhys Ifans ) , Daniel learns to contend with the rough - and - tumble world of the field agent : agent - running , deception , and the dangers and moral compromises .
In season 2 , four months after Miller was shot at the end of season 1 , he recovered from his injuries sufficiently to be given a new clandestine assignment : to infiltrate a far - right German political party believed to be planning an act of terror right before an upcoming election .
CAST MAIN * Richard Armitage as Daniel Miller , a cerebral CIA officer who shifts from working as an analyst at Langley headquarters in the US to serving as an undercover officer in Berlin and is tasked with finding a leak in CIA operations * Rhys Ifans as Hector DeJean , a disillusioned veteran CIA officer with dubious tactics and many secrets * Leland Orser as Robert Kirsch , a devoted and successful Deputy Chief who digs intelligence out of the city of Berlin through a mix of force , diligence , and cleverness * Michelle Forbes as Valerie Edwards , the no - nonsense administrator who serves as a Berlin Station Internal Branch Chief
* Richard Jenkins as Steven Frost , a veteran of the Cold War , who serves as the CIA 's Chief of the Berlin Station in season 1 and is retired at the start of season 2 * Tamlyn Tomita as Sandra Abe ( season 1 ) , a quiet presence leading the efficient operation of Berlin Station while having an affair with her boss , Steven * John Doman as Richard Hanes ( season 2 ) , the new American ambassador to Germany and an old friend of Steven 's * Keke Palmer as April Lewis ( season 2–present ) , the new young case officer assigned to Berlin Station * Ashley Judd as BB Yates ( season 2 ) , Berlin 's new Chief of Station , nicknamed " The Station Whisperer " * Ismael Cruz Córdova as Rafael Torres ( season 3 ) , an agent for the special activities division of the CIA , previously in the military RECURRING * Mina Tander as Esther Krug , a German BfV agent SEASON 1 *
April Grace as Jemma Moore , Steven 's superior at the CIA * Caroline Goodall as Kelly Frost , Steven 's wife * as Hans Richter , an old - world spy who has risen to the highest ranks of the BfV * as Julian De Vos , a courier funneling information from " Thomas Shaw " to Claudia Gartner * Claudia Michelsen as Patricia Schwarz , Miller 's cousin * as Ingrid Hollander , a German reporter * Zahra Ahmadi as Clare Itani , an American agent and DeJean 's girlfriend
* Daniela Ziegler as Golda Friedman , a Mossad agent * Sylvia Hoeks as Claudia Gartner , the courier between De Vos and Hollander SEASON 2 * Thomas Kretschmann as Otto Ganz , a German alt - right extremist
* Emilia Schüle as Lena Ganz , Otto 's daughter * Natalia Wörner as Katerina Gerhardt , head of the alt - right party Perspektive für Deutschland ( PfD , " perspective for Germany " )
* Heino Ferch as Joseph Emmerich , the # 2 leader of the PfD * Jannis Niewöhner as Armando , an undercover agent for the BfV * Scott William Winters as Nick Fischer , a CIA agent * Brandon Spink as Noah Kirsch , Robert Kirsch 's son EPISODES SEASON 1 ( 2016 )
SEASON 2 ( 2017 )
SEASON 3
( 2018–19 ) PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Epix announced a ten - episode straight - to - series order on May 21 , 2015 .
Michaël Roskam executive produced the series and directed the first two episodes .
Olen Steinhauer wrote and executive produced the series .
Production started in November 2015 .
Principal photography took place in Potsdam at Studio Babelsberg , which is co - producer of Berlin Station .
The whole interior of the CIA Station , which includes a security entrance as well as the big windowless office space within , was built on stages at Babelsberg 's studios .
Other scenes were shot on locations in Potsdam and Berlin , Germany .
On February 7 , 2018 , it was announced that Jason Horwitch would be joining the series as showrunner and executive producer .
He will be replacing Brad Winters who had served in those positions for the show 's first two seasons .
For the third season , production moved to Budapest , Hungary .
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
A 10-episode first season of Berlin Station premiered on Epix on October 16 , 2016 .
The series is exclusive to Netflix in Germany , Austria , Switzerland and Liechtenstein .
It is broadcast free - to - air and on - demand in Australia on SBS TV .
It also is available in Israel .
The series has been licensed to more than 150 territories worldwide .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Berlin Station has received generally positive reviews from critics .
On Metacritic , the show holds a rating of 64 out of 100 , based on 10 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS