TRAVIS SCOTT Jacques Berman Webster II ( born April 30 , 1992 ) , known professionally as Travis Scott ( formerly stylized as Travi$ Scott ) , is an American rapper , singer , songwriter and record producer .
In 2012 , Scott signed his first major - label deal with Epic Records .
In November of the same year , Scott signed a deal with Kanye West 's GOOD Music , as part of its production wing Very GOOD Beats , after appearing on the label 's 2012 compilation album Cruel Summer .
In April 2013 , Scott signed a record deal with T.I. 's Grand Hustle imprint .
Scott 's first full - length project , a mixtape titled Owl Pharaoh , was self - released in May 2013 .
This was followed with a second mixtape , titled Days Before Rodeo , in August 2014 .
His debut studio album , Rodeo , was released in September 2015 and was led by the hit single " Antidote " , which reached the top 20 of the US Billboard Hot 100 chart .
His second album , Birds in the Trap Sing McKnight , was released in September 2016 , to generally positive reviews .
The following year , Travis Scott released a collaborative album with Quavo titled Huncho Jack , Jack Huncho under the group name Huncho Jack .
He released his third album , Astroworld , on August 3 , 2018 ; it produced his first Hot 100 number one single , " Sicko Mode " .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Jacques Berman Webster II was born April 30 , 1992 in Houston , Texas .
He grew up in Missouri City , a middle - class suburban area bordering southwest Houston .
Webster lived with his grandmother , but later moved to the suburbs , where his father ran his own business .
Webster attended Elkins High School and graduated at seventeen .
Webster then attended the University of Texas San Antonio before dropping out his sophomore year to fully pursue his music career .
After dropping out , Webster immediately moved to New York City in an attempt to start his music career .
His parents , frustrated that he had dropped out of school , eventually cut him off financially .
CAREER
2008–12 :
CAREER BEGINNINGS AND RECORD DEALS Section::::Career .
Section::::2008–12 :
Career beginnings and record deals .
With longtime friend Chris Holloway he formed the duo The Graduates .
In 2008 , the duo released their untitled first EP on social networking website Myspace .
The following year , Scott and OG Chess , one of Travis 's schoolmates , formed the group The Classmates .
The Classmates released two projects , with Buddy Rich in 2009 and Cruis'n USA in 2010 .
Scott mainly handled production work on both projects .
The duo remained together until late 2012 , when personal conflicts and financial disputes led to the disbandment of the group .
After leaving college , Scott moved from Houston , Texas , to Washington , New York , where Scott began working with friend Mike Waxx , who owned the music website Illroots .
After moving to New York , Scott slept on the floor at his friend 's house and spent most of his time at Just Blaze 's studio .
Eventually frustrated in New York and the lack of progression , Scott moved to Los Angeles , California , after only four months in the state .
In Los Angeles , Webster was abandoned by his friend who had promised to help him by providing housing .
His parents cut him off financially
and he eventually was forced to relocate back to Houston , where his parents kicked him out of their home .
Webster moved back to Los Angeles once again and began to sleep on the couch of a friend who studied at University of Southern California .
Atlanta - based rapper and owner of Grand Hustle Records , T.I. would later hear one of Webster 's productions , titled " Lights ( Love Sick ) " .
While in Los Angeles , T.I. 's representative contacted Webster , asking him to attend a studio for a meeting .
During the meeting , T.I. freestyled over " Animal " , one of Webster 's productions .
2012–14 : OWL PHARAOH AND DAYS BEFORE RODEO Section::::2012–14 :
Owl Pharaoh and Days Before Rodeo .
Scott 's first solo full - length project is a mixtape titled Owl Pharaoh , which was set to be released as a free download in 2012 .
However , the project was delayed , and was announced to be slated for a later release .
The project was later re - created by Kanye West and Mike Dean , and was then again delayed for sample clearance issues .
In promotion Scott would release the track , " Blocka La Flame " , a remix of fellow GOOD Music label - mate Pusha T 's single " Blocka " ( which features production and vocals from Scott ) .
The song was produced by Young Chop , with additional production by Scott himself , alongside Mike Dean .
On March 22 , 2013 , Scott released the music video for a song titled " Quintana " , set to appear on Owl Pharaoh .
The mixtape 's version of the song features guest vocals from fellow American rapper Wale , while the production was handled by Scott himself , alongside Sak Pase and Mike Dean .
On March 27 , XXL revealed that Scott was a member of their Freshman Class of 2013 .
On March 29 , 2013 , following his interview with British disc jockey , DJ Semtex , Scott premiered a snippet of his commercial debut single , titled " Upper Echelon " , featuring 2 Chainz and T.I.
On April 2 , 2013 , Scott stated Owl Pharaoh was his official debut mixtape and would be released on the iTunes Store on May 21 , 2013 .
On April 23 , 2013 , " Upper Echelon " was sent to urban contemporary radio .
The EP was released for free download .
On March 13 , 2014 , Scott performed a new song , tentativs Twitter account that the song is not called " 1975 " , and would be included on his second mixtape , titled Days Before Rodeo .
He would later take to his Twitter account to announce Rodeo , as the official title for his major - label debut studio album .
On May 5 , 2014 , Scott released the full version of the song , with its new title " Do n't Play " , featuring a sample of the song " M.O.N.E.Y " by the English rock band the 1975 .
On July 11 , 2014 , " Do n't Play " was officially released as the lead single from Days Before Rodeo , via digital distribution .
Following the success of Days Before Rodeo , Scott announced that he would headline a concert tour , called The Rodeo Tour , with Rich Gang 's rapper Young Thug and producer Metro Boomin .
The tour started on March 1 , 2015 , in Santa Ana , California , and ended on April 1 , 2015 , in Portland , Oregon .
The tour ran through major cities such as Denver , Colorado , Houston , Texas , Chicago , Illinois , Detroit , Michigan , New York City , Atlanta , Georgia , Philadelphia , San Diego , Los Angeles , San Francisco , California and Seattle , Washington .
Second shows were added to some cities such as Los Angeles and New York City , after his first shows had sold out too quickly towards the eyes of his fans .
Artists such as Kanye West , Chris Brown , Wale and Birdman made special guest appearances in certain cities .
Scott 's Rodeo Tour has been acclaimed to be one of today 's wildest rap tours .
2015–16
: RODEO AND BIRDS IN THE TRAP SING MCKNIGHT Section::::2015–16 : Rodeo and Birds in the Trap Sing McKnight .
Rodeo was released on September 4 , 2015 , by Grand Hustle and Epic Records .
The album features guest appearances from Quavo , Juicy J , Kanye West , The Weeknd , Swae Lee , Chief Keef , Justin Bieber , Young Thug and Toro y Moi , Big Buck and includes production from Mike Dean , Kanye West , WondaGurl , Suber , DJ Dahi , Metro Boomin , 1500 or Nothin' , Sonny Digital , Southside , Terrace Martin , Zaytoven , Pharrell Williams and Scott himself , among others .
The album was supported by two singles : " 3500 " featuring Future and 2 Chainz , and " Antidote " .
The latter became his highest - charting single on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart , peaking at number 16 .
Rodeo received generally positive reviews from critics and debuted at number three on the US Billboard 200 chart .
It also debuted at number one on the Billboard Rap Albums chart .
On January 4 , 2016 , Scott would announce that he has a new studio album on the way .
On February 8 , 2016 , it was announced that iLoveMakonnen , Vic Mensa and Travis Scott , would be a part of the " WANGSQUAD " , an Alexander Wang campaign .
On March 29 , 2016 , 300 Entertainment executive Lyor Cohen , revealed that Scott and Young Thug were releasing a single together and called Scott 's upcoming album a " classic " .
On April 7 , 2016 , Scott previewed a single with Young Thug at one of his shows .
On May 17 , 2016 , Scott announced that the title of his second album would be Birds in the Trap Sing McKnight , while also confirming the title for his third album to be Astroworld .
On June 3 , 2016 , the collaborative single between Thug and Scott was released , titled " Pick Up the Phone " .
The single , which also features vocals from Quavo of Atlanta - based rap trio Migos , reached number 43 on the Billboard Hot 100 and was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) .
On August 31 , 2016 , Scott announced that Birds in the Trap Sing McKnight was finally finished in a post on Instagram .
Scott premiered the album on his third episode of .wav radio on September 2 , 2016 , and was later released on iTunes and Apple Music .
On September 11 , 2016 , the album became Scott 's first number one album on the US Billboard 200 .
On September 12 , 2016 , Universal Music Publishing Group 's CEO , Jody Gerson announced that the label signed a worldwide deal with Scott .
In the same episode Scott premiered Birds in the Trap Sing McKnight , he also announced that he would be executive producing on Kanye West 's Cruel Winter , a follow up to his G.O.O.D. Music label 's debut compilation Cruel Summer .
In the episode he described the upcoming album as , " very youthful , straight to the point , like the illest ever , man , like the illest album . "
2017–PRESENT :
HUNCHO JACK , JACK HUNCHO AND ASTROWORLD
Section::::2017–present :
Huncho Jack , Jack Huncho and Astroworld .
Scott performed at All - Star Weekend on February 16 , 2017 , in New Orleans at Champion Square .
He also performed at New Orleans BUKU Music + Art Project festival on March 10 , 2017 .
On March 5 , Scott announced a concert tour called " Birds Eye View " .
The next day , the dates and cities for the tour were unveiled , with it beginning on March 10 , in New Orleans , Louisiana , and coming to an end on June 2 , in Eugene , Oregon .
In March 2017 , Scott announced he would be launching his own imprint , under the name of Cactus Jack Records .
During an interview , Scott said , " I 'm not doing it to have financial control over my music .
I want first and foremost to help other artists , launch new names , to provide opportunities .
I want to do for them what happened to me , but better .
By better I mean no bullshit .
No lying to the artists about album release dates or the budgets of videos and albums . "
On June 15 , 2017 , Scott announced he would be doing a European leg of the " Birds Eye View Tour " .
The European leg started on the June 23 in Paris , and concluded on July 9 in Turku , Finland .
This leg was mainly festival sets or in smaller club settings .
On April 3 , 2017 , it was reported Scott had been working on a collaborative album with Atlanta - based rapper Quavo of Migos , potentially to be released later in 2017 .
Speaking to GQ , he confirmed : ' The Quavo album is coming soon .
I 'm dropping new music soon .
You know how I do it though : I like surprises .
In addition to the collaborative album , Scott announced his third studio album Astroworld , named after the defunct Houston theme park of the same name , is nearing completion and would most likely be released in 2017 .
Scott was also featured on a track from Canadian rapper Drake 's project More Life ( 2017 ) , titled " Portland " .
The song peaked at number nine on the US Billboard Hot 100 , becoming his first top ten song as a featured artist .
On May 16 , 2017 , Scott released three new tracks on SoundCloud , after teasing on social media for some time .
The tracks were named " A Man " , " Green & Purple ( featuring Playboi Carti ) " , and " Butterfly Effect " .
The latter was also released on every other streaming service , as the only track .
The music video for " Butterfly Effect " was released on July 14 , 2017 .
On August 10 , 2017 , Scott tweeted " ALBUM MODE " as he had just finished the " DAMN .
Tour " as a supporting act for Kendrick Lamar , the night before .
This tweet signified that he was now working on his album AstroWorld full - time .
On August 27 , 2017 , Scott performed with Thirty Seconds to Mars at the 2017 MTV Video Music Awards on their single " Walk On Water " .
On September 18 , 2017 , Quavo and the Migos did an interview .
Quavo stated that his album with Travis Scott is coming " real soon " .
He also stated that he and Travis Scott have over 20 records ready .
In October 2017 , Scott was featured in a special piece titled " Deserve " , by Chinese born Canadian rapper Kris Wu .
On December 7 , 2017 , a clip of Quavo being interviewed by Zane Lowe was posted on the official Twitter account for Beats 1 .
When asked about the title of their upcoming project , he confirmed it would be Huncho Jack , Jack Huncho .
Scott was featured on Trippie Redd 's " Dark Knight Dummo " on December 6 , 2017 .
The song peaked at 72 on the Billboard Hot 100 .
On December 21 , 2017 , Webster and Quavo released their collaborative album , Huncho Jack , Jack Huncho .
The album debuted at number 3 on the Billboard 200 and had seven tracks chart on the Billboard Hot 100 .
After the release of Huncho Jack , Jack Huncho , Webster was spotted in the studio a lot more frequently and Billboard slated an expected first quarter release for AstroWorld .
On May 3 , 2018 , Travis Scott released a single titled " Watch " featuring Kanye West and Lil Uzi Vert .
The single was released as promotional material for his upcoming third studio album Astroworld .
Astroworld was released on August 3 , 2018 to critical acclaim , and debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 . "
Sicko Mode " , the album 's second single , peaked at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming Scott 's highest charting solo single .
Scott was featured on five tracks of Metro Boomin 's Not All Heroes Wear Capes .
ARTISTRY Section::::Artistry .
Scott has stated that he is influenced by Bon Iver , Kid Cudi , M.I.A. , Kanye West , Toro y Moi , Tame Impala , T.I. and Thom Yorke Spin magazine compared his 2013 mixtape Owl Pharaoh to that of Kid Cudi 's .
Scott makes heavy use of audio manipulation effects such as Auto - tune , phasing , delays , and stereo - sculpted chorusing and harmony structures , predominantly influenced by producers Mike Dean and Alex Tumay .
Scott 's musical style has been described as a " blend between traditional Hip - Hop and Lo - fi " and often characterized as " Ambient " ; Scott himself has said " I 'm not Hip - Hop " .
Vulture described Scott 's sound as " unremittingly dark , syncretic , hi - res , and above all unnatural . "
Scott has said that he is a fan of Broadway theatre and would like to do an album of show tune covers , and he moreover has said that he would like to write his own musical in future .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Scott began dating reality television star and entrepreneur Kylie Jenner in April 2017 .
On February 1 , 2018 , Jenner gave birth to their first child , daughter Stormi Webster .
DISCOGRAPHY Section::::Discography .
Studio albums
* Rodeo ( 2015 )
* Birds in the Trap Sing McKnight ( 2016 )
* Astroworld ( 2018 ) Collaborative albums * Huncho Jack , Jack Huncho ( 2017 )
Mixtapes
* Owl Pharaoh ( 2013 )
* Days Before Rodeo ( 2014 ) AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Year ! !
Awards ! !
Category ! !
Nominated work ! !
Result ! !
rowspan="5 " BET
Hip
Hop Awards
Hot Ticket Performer rowspan="5"Himself rowspan="5 " rowspan="2 " People 's Choice Awards Song of the Year rowspan="1""Butterfly Effect " rowspan="2 " Album of the Year
rowspan="1"Astroworld
MTV Europe Music Awards
Best Hip - Hop Himself GRAMMY AWARDS Section::::Grammy Awards .
The Grammy Awards are awarded annually by the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences .
Scott has six nominations .
rowspan="1"2014
" New Slaves " Best Rap Song rowspan="1"2017 Purpose Album of the Year 2018 " Love Galore " Best Rap / Sung Performance rowspan="3"2019 rowspan="2""Sicko Mode "
Best Rap Performance
Best Rap Song
Astroworld
Best
Rap Album CONCERT TOURS Section::::Concert tours .
Headlining
* Rodeo Tour ( with Young Thug and Metro Boomin ) ( 2015 )
* Birds Eye View Tour ( North America and Europe ) ( 2017 )
* Astroworld : Wish You Were Here
Tour ( 2018–19 )
( with Trippie Redd , Sheck Wes and Gunna ) Supporting * Never
Sober Tour ( with Juicy J and Project Pat ) ( 2015 )
*
The Madness Tour ( with The Weeknd and Banks ) ( 2015 )
* The Anti World Tour ( with Rihanna ) ( 2016 )
*
The Damn .
Tour ( with Kendrick Lamar and DRAM )
( 2017 )
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS