THE INFINITE SEA
The Infinite Sea is a young adult science fiction novel written by American author Rick Yancey .
It was published on September 16 , 2014 by G. P. Putnam 's Sons .
The novel is the second in The 5th Wave trilogy , preceded by The 5th Wave and followed by The Last Star .
After fleeing from a camp established by aliens , 16-year - old Cassie Sullivan , her brother and a squad of child soldiers attempt to prevent the extermination of the human race .
The novel provides detailed histories of the secondary characters from the previous novel .
Instead of just narration from Cassie , the narration shifts from the point of view of another teenage girl called Ringer .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
A few days after the events of the first novel , Cassie , Ben , and the rest of squad 53 have taken refuge at a hotel , which they call " Walker Hotel " in honor of Evan Walker , who is thought to be dead after destroying Camp Haven .
Ringer , believing that their refuge in the hotel will not last , goes out searching for a cave system mentioned on a brochure .
Teacup , whom she had grown close to , sneaks up on Ringer who shoots her , having mistaken Teacup for a Silencer .
A helicopter flies in and they are both captured by The Others .
While Cassie and the others anxiously await Ringer , they realize that Teacup has gone missing , and Dumbo and Poundcake set out to find her but return empty - handed .
Evan Walker is revealed to have survived Camp Haven 's destruction , and is wounded and hurt .
He is rescued by Grace , a fellow Silencer , and head to her makeshift home .
They spot Cassie at the hotel from an interstate on their way there .
After one of Grace 's hunts she tries to seduce Evan , but he attacks her .
While escaping her house , Grace shoots at him , but lets him go , knowing that he will lead her to Cassie .
While he rests , Grace finds and confronts him .
They are attacked by child soldiers from Camp Haven and Grace is shot at , giving Evan the opportunity to escape .
Evan finds the hotel they stay at , and disarms Ben in a misunderstanding , though Ben stabs his leg .
Evan finds Sammy and , seeing the gun in his hands , dives at him .
Cassie shoots him once and he is rendered unconscious .
Ben angrily waits for him to awaken .
Cassie defends him while Ben throws constant insults toward him .
In the midst of this , they hear a helicopter approach ; however , it quickly flies off .
Then , they see a small girl walking down the hallway , whom Sammy identifies as " Megan " .
Megan says that her throat hurts before passing out .
The group cares for her , though when Evan awakes , he warns them not to , explaining that The Others planted a bomb in her throat rigged to detonate on high concentrations of carbon dioxide .
The group moves outside , a distance from the hotel , while Cassie and Evan stay behind to remove the bomb from her throat .
With a struggle , Cassie manages to safely remove the bomb and she contains it in a plastic baggie .
Ben and Poundcake have been collecting CO2 canisters so that the bomb can be detonated at a safe distance away .
Grace appears as Cassie and Evan finish the operation .
She forcefully kisses Evan in front of Cassie .
The squad arrives and chaos ensues : Poundcake is shot , and helicopter flies in during struggle , and Grace appears to destroy the helicopter and kill the pilot .
While this is happening , Evan tells Cassie of a pod sent down from the mothership to extract Grace that will be her temporary home .
He shows her how to find it and shows her the bomb they removed from Megan 's throat .
Sammy takes the bomb as he rushes by on his way out .
Evan makes Cassie promise " to end it " and insists that he be left behind .
As she knows she has no other choice , Cassie kisses him and leaves .
A short distance from the hotel Sammy turns and starts running back , Cassie catches him and he says that he dropped the baggie , the hotel explodes , Cassie thinks Evan sacrificed himself .
Unable to carry him , the group leaves a mortally wounded Poundcake and continues to move away from the hotel .
Poundcake crawls back to the hotel , finds the lost explosive device , and blows it up an arm 's length away from Grace .
Ringer is taken to another " training " camp , much like Camp Haven , with Colonel Vosch having taken over command of the camp .
Ringer semi - befriends a recruit named Razor , who knows of the conspiracy and that the officials at camp are actually The Others .
Ringer asks Vosch about the whereabouts of Teacup and Vosch tells her that she is alive .
Vosch , Razor , and a woman named Claire , enhance her with the 12th system ( neural chip and nanobots ) , a piece of Other technology designed to strengthen the human anatomy .
Ringer and Razor conspire to escape .
The plan is carried out successfully , Ringer kills Claire and disables Jumbo , knocks out Teacup , and forces a pilot to fly them in a helicopter .
Before it crashes , the pilot , Razor , and Teacup bailout .
Ringer jumps without a parachute and lands in an ice covered lake .
After meeting at the crash site , Ringer soon discovers that Razor was secretly working with Vosch .
She had sensed something through the 12th system when she kissed him prior to the jump from the helicopter .
She knocks him out and heads to the warehouse , which had been converted to a hospital at the time of the 3rd Wave .
She finds Vosch in it , who openly invites her to a fight .
Vosch wins easily and reveals that Silencers are not actually " Others " .
They are just humans enhanced by the 12th system neural chip that contains a construct program to make them believe they are " Others " , never controlled or linked to the " Others " .
It is unclear if Vosch is human .
Razor is charged with guarding and helping to heal her ; eventually they reconcile .
When they return to base , Vosch questions Ringer about what the " solution " is .
She states that the " Others " do n't mean to exterminate all humans .
Vosch states that the " Others " could have simply eliminated all humans by dropping a big rock on them and hints there is a specific goal to be gained through the wave attacks .
Vosch tells Ringer he has enhanced her to hunt down and kill Walker , and that he needs someone like her because the destroyed drones were meant to track the enhanced humans , not normal humans .
Razor whispers to Ringer about the leverage Vosch has on her because of Teacup , and proceeds to shoot and kill Teacup .
Razor in turn is shot and dies .
The chaos gives Ringer a chance to escape by diving out a window .
At the end , Cassie and squad 53 are recovering from the explosion .
From the woods , Evan emerges and Cassie goes to meet him .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS