ALLIUM Allium is a genus of monocotyledonous flowering plants that includes hundreds of species , including the cultivated onion , garlic , scallion , shallot , leek , and chives .
The generic name Allium is the Latin word for garlic , and the type species for the genus is Allium sativum which means " cultivated garlic " .
Linnaeus first described the genus Allium in 1753 .
Some sources refer to Greek αλεω ( aleo , to avoid ) by reason of the smell of garlic .
Various Allium have been cultivated from the earliest times , and about a dozen species are economically important as crops , or garden vegetables , and an increasing number of species are important as ornamental plants .
The decision to include a species in the genus Allium is taxonomically difficult , and species boundaries are unclear .
Estimates of the number of species are as low as 260 , and as high as 979 .
Allium species occur in temperate climates of the Northern Hemisphere , except for a few species occurring in Chile ( such as A. juncifolium ) , Brazil ( A. sellovianum ) , and tropical Africa ( A. spathaceum ) .
They vary in height between 5 cm and 150 cm .
The flowers form an umbel at the top of a leafless stalk .
The bulbs vary in size between species , from small ( around 2–3 mm in diameter ) to rather large ( 8–10 cm ) .
Some species ( such as Welsh onion A. fistulosum ) develop thickened leaf - bases rather than forming bulbs as such .
Plants of the genus Allium produce chemical compounds , mostly derived from cysteine sulfoxides , that give them a characteristic onion , or garlic , taste and odor .
Many are used as food plants , though not all members of the genus are equally flavorful .
In most cases , both bulb and leaves are edible .
The cooking and consumption of parts of the plants is due to the large variety of textures , and flavours , which may be strong or weak , that they can impart to the dish they are used in .
The characteristic Allium flavor depends on the sulfate content of the soil the plant grows in .
In the rare occurrence of sulfur - free growth conditions , all Allium species completely lose their usual pungency .
In the APG III classification system , Allium is placed in the family Amaryllidaceae , subfamily Allioideae ( formerly the family Alliaceae ) .
In some of the older classification systems , Allium was placed in Liliaceae .
Molecular phylogenetic studies have shown this circumscription of Liliaceae is not monophyletic .
Allium is one of about fifty - seven genera of flowering plants with more than 500 species .
It is by far the largest genus in the Amaryllidaceae , and also in the Alliaceae in classification systems in which that family is recognized as separate .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The genus Allium ( alliums ) is characterised by herbaceous geophyte perennials with true bulbs , some of which are borne on rhizomes and an onion or garlic odor and flavor .
The bulbs are solitary or clustered and tunicate and the plants are perennialized by the bulbs reforming annually from the base of the old bulbs , or are produced on the ends of rhizomes or , in a few species , at the ends of stolons .
A small number of species have tuberous roots .
The bulbs ' outer coats are commonly brown or grey , with a smooth texture , and are fibrous , or with cellular reticulation .
The inner coats of the bulbs are membranous .
Many alliums have basal leaves that commonly wither away from the tips downward before or while the plants flower , but some species have persistent foliage .
Plants produce from one to 12 leaves , most species having linear , channeled or flat leaf blades .
The leaf blades are straight or variously coiled , but some species have broad leaves , including A. victorialis and A. tricoccum .
The leaves are sessile , and very rarely narrowed into a petiole .
The flowers , which are produced on scapes are erect or in some species pendent , having six petal - like tepals produced in two whorls .
The flowers have one style and six epipetalous stamens ; the anthers and pollen can vary in color depending on the species .
The ovaries are superior , and three - lobed with three locules .
The fruits are capsules that open longitudinally along the capsule wall between the partitions of the locule .
The seeds are black , and have a rounded shape .
The terete or flattened flowering scapes are normally persistent .
The inflorescences are umbels , in which the outside flowers bloom first and flowering progresses to the inside .
Some species produce bulbils within the umbels , and in some species , such as Allium paradoxum , the bulbils replace some or all the flowers .
The umbels are subtended by noticeable spathe bracts , which are commonly fused and normally have around three veins .
Some bulbous alliums increase by forming little bulbs or " offsets " around the old one , as well as by seed .
Several species can form many bulbils in the flowerhead ; in the so - called " tree onion " or Egyptian onion ( A. × proliferum )
the bulbils are few , but large enough to be pickled .
Many of the species of Allium have been used as food items throughout their ranges .
There are several poisonous species that are somewhat similar in appearance ( e.g. in North America , death camas , Toxicoscordion venenosum ) , but none of these has the distinctive scent of onions or garlic .
TAXONOMY Section::::Taxonomy .
With over 850 species Allium is the sole genus in the Allieae , one of four tribes of subfamily Allioideae ( Amaryllidaceae ) .
New species continue to be described and Allium is one of the largest monocotyledonous genera , but the precise taxonomy of Allium is poorly understood , with incorrect descriptions being widespread .
The difficulties arise from the fact that the genus displays considerable polymorphism and has adapted to a wide variety of habitats .
Furthermore , traditional classications had been based on homoplasious characteristics ( the independent evolution of similar features in species of different lineages ) .
However , the genus has been shown to be monophyletic , containing three major clades , although some proposed subgenera are not .
Some progress is being made using molecular phylogenetic methods , and the internal transcribed spacer ( ITS ) region , including the 5.8S rDNA and the two spacers ITS1 and ITS2 , is one of the more commonly used markers in the study of the differentiation of the Allium species .
Allium includes a number of taxonomic groupings previously considered separate genera ( Caloscordum Herb .
, Milula Prain and Nectaroscordum Lindl . )
Allium spicatum had been treated by many authors as Milula spicata , the only species in the monospecific genus Milula .
In 2000 , it was shown to be embedded in Allium .
PHYLOGENY HISTORY Section::::History .
When Linnaeus formerly described the genus Allium in his Species Plantarum ( 1753 ) , there were thirty species with this name .
He placed Allium in a grouping he referred to as Hexandria monogynia ( i.e. six stamens and one pistil ) containing 51 genera in all .
SUBDIVISION Section::::Subdivision .
Linnaeus originally grouped his 30 species into three alliances , e.g. Foliis caulinis planis .
Since then , many attempts have been made to divide the growing number of recognised species into infrageneric subgroupings , initially as sections , and then as subgenera further divided into sections .
For a brief history , see Li et al .
( 2010 )
The modern era of phylogenetic analysis dates to 1996 .
In 2006 Friesen , Fritsch , and Blattner described a new classification with 15 subgenera , 56 sections , and about 780 species based on the nuclear ribosomal gene internal transcribed spacers .
Some of the subgenera correspond to the once separate genera ( Caloscordum , Milula , Nectaroscordum ) included in the Gilliesieae .
The terminology has varied with some authors subdividing subgenera into Sections and others Alliances .
The term Alliance has also been used for subgroupings within species , e.g. Allium nigrum , and for subsections .
Subsequent molecular phylogenetic studies have shown the 2006 classification is a considerable improvement over previous classifications , but some of its subgenera and sections are probably not monophyletic .
Meanwhile , the number of new species continued to increase , reaching 800 by 2009 , and the pace of discovery has not decreased .
Detailed studies have focused on a number of subgenera , including Amerallium .
Amerallium is strongly supported as monophyletic .
Subgenus Melanocrommyum has also been the subject of considerable study ( see below ) , while work on subgenus Allium has focussed on section Allium , including Allium ampeloprasum , although sampling was not sufficient to test the monophyly of the section .
The major evolutionary lineages or lines correspond to the three major clades .
Line one ( the oldest ) with three subgenera is predominantly bulbous , the second , with five subgenera and the third with seven subgenera contain both bulbous and rhizomatous taxa .
EVOLUTIONARY LINES AND SUBGENERA Section::::Evolutionary lines and subgenera .
The three evolutionary lineages and 15 subgenera represent the classification scheme of Friesen et al .
( 2006 ) and Li ( 2010 ) .
( number of sections / number of species )
* First evolutionary line
* Nectaroscordum Type :
Allium siculum ( 1/3 ) Mediterranean bells , Sicilian honey garlic * * Microscordum Type :
Allium monanthum ( 1/1 ) * * Amerallium Type :
Allium canadense ( 12/135 )
*
* Second evolutionary line * Caloscordum Type :
Allium neriniflorum ( 1/3 ) * * Anguinum Type : Allium victorialis ( 1/12 ) * * Porphyroprason Type :
Allium oreophilum ( 1/1 ) * * Vvedenskya Type :
Allium kujukense ( 1/1 ) * * Melanocrommyum Type :
Allium nigrum ( 20/160 )
*
* Third evolutionary line * Butomissa Type :
Allium ramosum ( 2/4 ) fragrant garlic * * Cyathophora Type :
Allium cyathophorum ( 3/5 )
*
*
Rhizirideum Type :
Allium senescens ( 5/37 ) * * Allium Type :
Allium sativum ( 15/300 )
garlic *
* Reticulatobulbosa Type :
Allium lineare ( 5/80 ) * * Polyprason Type : Allium moschatum ( 4/50 ) * * Cepa Type :
Allium cepa ( 5/30 ) onion , garden onion , bulb onion ,
common onion *
FIRST EVOLUTIONARY LINE Section::::First evolutionary line .
Although this lineage consists of three subgenera , nearly all the species are attributed to subgenus Amerallium , the third largest subgenus of Allium .
The lineage is considered to represent the most ancient line within Allium , and to be the only lineage that is purely bulbous , the other two having both bulbous and rhizomatous taxa .
Within the lineage Amerallium is a sister group to the other two subgenera ( Microscordum+Nectaroscordum ) .
SECOND EVOLUTIONARY LINE Section::::Second evolutionary line .
Nearly all the species in this lineage of five subgenera are accounted for by subgenus Melanocrommyum , which is most closely associated with subgenera Vvedenskya and Porphyroprason , phylogenetically .
These three genera are late - branching whereas the remaining two subgenera , Caloscordum and Anguinum , are early branching .
THIRD EVOLUTIONARY LINE Section::::Third evolutionary line .
The third evolutionary line contains the most number of sections ( seven ) and also the largest subgenus of the genus Allium , subgenus Allium which includes the type species of the genus , Allium sativum .
This subgenus also contains the majority of the species in the line .
Within the lineage the phylogeny is complex .
Two small subgenera Butomissa and Cyathophora form a sister clade to the remaining five subgenera , with Butomissa as the first branching group .
Amongst the remaining five subgenera , Rhizirideum forms a medium - sized subgenus that is the sister to the other four larger subgenera .
However , they may not be monophyletic .
DISTRIBUTION AND HABITAT Section::::Distribution and habitat .
The majority of Allium species are native to the Northern Hemisphere , being spread throughout the holarctic region , from dry subtropics to the boreal zone , but predominantly in Asia .
Of the latter 138 species occur in China , about a sixth of all species , representing five subgenera .
A few species are native to Africa and Central and South America .
A single known exception , Allium dregeanum occurs in the Southern Hemisphere ( South Africa ) .
There are two centres of diversity , a major one from the Mediterranean Basin to Central Asia and Pakistan , while a minor one is found in western North America .
The genus is especially diverse in the eastern Mediterranean .
ECOLOGY Section::::Ecology .
Species grow in various conditions from dry , well - drained mineral - based soils to moist , organic soils ; most grow in sunny locations , but a number also grow in forests ( e.g. , A. ursinum ) , or even in swamps or water .
Various Allium species are used as food plants by the larvae of the leek moth and onion fly as well as some Lepidoptera including cabbage moth , common swift moth ( recorded on garlic ) , garden dart moth , large yellow underwing moth , nutmeg moth , setaceous Hebrew character moth , turnip moth and Schinia rosea , a moth that feeds exclusively on Allium species .
CULTIVATION Section::::Cultivation .
Many Allium species have been harvested through human history , but only about a dozen are still economically important today as crops or garden vegetables .
ORNAMENTAL Section::::Ornamental .
Many Allium species and hybrids are cultivated as ornamentals .
These include A. cristophii and A. giganteum , which are used as border plants for their ornamental flowers , and their " architectural " qualities .
Several hybrids have been bred , or selected , with rich purple flowers .
A. hollandicum ' Purple Sensation ' is one of the most popular and has been given an Award of Garden Merit ( H4 ) .
These ornamental onions produce spherical umbels on single stalks in spring and summer , in a wide variety of sizes and colours , ranging from white ( Allium ' Mont Blanc ' ) , blue ( A. caeruleum ) , to yellow ( A. flavum ) and purple ( A. giganteum ) .
By contrast , other species ( such as invasive A. triquetrum and A. ursinum ) can become troublesome garden weeds .
The following cultivars , of uncertain or mixed parentage , have gained the Royal Horticultural Society 's Award of Garden Merit : * ' Ambassador ' * ' Beau Regard '
* ' Gladiator ' * ' Globemaster ' * ' Round and Purple ' TOXICITY Section::::Toxicity .
Dogs and cats are very susceptible to poisoning after the consumption of certain species .
USES Section::::Uses .
The genus includes many economically important species .
These include onions ( A. cepa ) , French shallots ( A. oschaninii ) , leeks ( A. ampeloprasum ) , scallions ( various Allium species ) , and herbs such as garlic ( A. sativum ) and chives ( A. schoenoprasum ) .
Some have been used as traditional medicines .
SEE ALSO
REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY
BOOKS
CHAPTERS
* , in ARTICLES * N. Friesen , R. Fritsch and K. Bachmann .
Hybrid origin of some ornamentals of Allium subgenus Melanocrommyum verified with GISH and RAPD .
TAG Theoretical and Applied Genetics .
Volume 95 , Number 8 , December , 1997 *
[ In Chinese . ]
* A. Samoylov , N. Friesen , S. Pollner , P. Hanelt .
Use of chloroplast DNA polymorphisms for the phylogenetic study of Allium subgenus Amerallium and subgenus Bromatorrhiza ( Alliaceae ) II .
Feddes Repertorium Volume 110 Issue 1–2 , Pages 103–109 , 1999 WEBSITES
* Pacific Bulb Society :
Allium * Pacific Bulb Society :
Rhizomatous Alliums
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Allium At : Index Nominum Genericorum
At : References At : NMNH Department of Botany *
Bloomsta.com Florist Community * Reinhard M. Fritsch .
Checklist of ornamental Allium species and cultivars currently offered in the trade .
2015