HEX KEY
A hex key , Allen key or Allen wrench is a tool used to drive bolts and screws with hexagonal sockets in their heads .
The Allen name is a registered trademark , originated by the Allen Manufacturing Company of Hartford , Connecticut circa 1910 , and currently owned by Apex Tool Group , LLC .
Its genericised use is discouraged by this company .
The standard generic name used in catalogues and published books and journals is " hex key " .
NOMENCLATURE Section::::Nomenclature .
Explained by the geographical and commercial history of the drive type 's development , the term " hex key " is best known as " Allen " in the USA ( The " Allen " name is a registered trademark , originated by the Allen Manufacturing Company of Hartford , Connecticut circa 1910 , now owned by Apex Tool Group , LLC , which was acquired by Bain Capital in 2014 ) , and also in Spain ( llave Allen pronounced with Spanish double L , ) , as " Inbus " in Germany ( the term " INBUS " is a registered trademark , originally an acronym for introduced in 1934 by the German company Bauer & Schaurte , in 2015 acquired by INBUS IP GmbH , Breckerfeld , Germany ) , and as " Unbrako " key or wrench in Scandinavia ( originally a Pennsylvania company established in 1911 , in 2008 acquired by Deepak Fasteners Limited ) .
In Italy , it is known as brugola , for the company Officine Egidio Brugola ( established 1926 ) .
The term " hex - head " is sometimes used to refer to this type of drive , but this use is not consistent with its more conventional use referring to external - wrenching hexagons .
In the fastener industry , the terms " socket head " or " hex socket head " are generally used for the driven part of the driver – driven pair .
A less common synonym is " female hex " .
FEATURES Section::::Features .
Some features of hex keys are : *
The tool is simple , small and light *
The contact surfaces of the screw or bolt are protected from external damage
*
There are six contact surfaces between bolt and driver *
The tool can be used with a headless screw * The screw can be inserted into its hole using the key * Torque is constrained by the length and thickness of the key * Very small bolt heads can be accommodated *
The tool can be manufactured very cheaply , so one is often included with products requiring end - user assembly *
Either end of the tool can be used to take advantage of reach or torque
*
The tool is L - shaped and is often designed to be used with both sides *
The tool can be reconditioned using an electric grinder by removing the worn - out part , and then it works like new *
The hexagon is typically a smaller diameter than would be used with an external cap , and is more likely to round off its contact surfaces .
*
It is much more difficult to turn a damaged ( rounded or otherwise ) internal fastener than an external one .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Extant records suggest ( without offering exhaustive documentation ) that the idea of a hex socket screw drive was probably conceived as early as the 1860s to the 1890s , but that such screws were probably not manufactured until around 1910 .
Rybczynski ( 2000 ) describes a flurry of patents for alternative drive types in the 1860s to the 1890s in the US , which are confirmed to include internal - wrenching square and triangle types ( that is , square and triangular sockets ) ( ) , but he explains that these were patented but not manufactured due to the difficulties and expense of doing so at the time .
P. L. Robertson , of Milton , Ontario , Canada , first commercialized the square socket in 1908 , having perfected and patented a manufacturing method ( cold - forming , using the right material and the right die design ) .
In 1909–1910 , William G. Allen patented a method of cold - forming screw heads around a hexagonal die ( ) .
Published advertisements for the " Allen safety set screw " by the Allen Manufacturing Company of Hartford , Connecticut , exist from 1910 .
Although it is unlikely that Allen was the first person to think of a hex socket drive , his patent for a manufacturing method and his realized product appear to be the first .
In his autobiography , the founder of the Standard Pressed Steel Company ( SPS ; now SPS Technologies , Inc. ) ,
Howard T. Hallowell Sr , presents a version of events in which SPS developed a hex socket drive in - house , independently of Allen , circa 1911 .
From this came the line of products .
This account from Hallowell does not mention the Allen patent of 1910 , nor the Allen safety set screw product line .
Hallowell does describe , however , the same inspiration also mentioned in connection with Allen for a wave of adoption of the hex socket head , beginning with set screws and followed by cap screws .
This was an industrial safety campaign , part of the larger Progressive Movement , to get headless set screws onto the pulleys and shafts of the line shafting that was ubiquitous in factories of the day .
The headless set screws would be less likely to catch the clothing of workers and pull them into injurious contact with the running shaft .
SPS at the time was a prominent maker of shaft hangers and collars , the latter of which were set in place with set screws .
In pursuit of headless set screws with a better drive than a straight slot , Hallowell said , SPS had sourced set screws of square - socket drive from Britain , but they were very expensive .
( This was only 2 years after Robertson 's Canadian patent . )
This cost problem drove SPS to purchase its first screw machine and make its screws in - house , which soon led to SPS 's foray into fastener sales ( for which it later became well known within the metalworking industries ) .
Hallowell said that " [ for ] a while we experimented with a screw containing a square hole like the British screw but soon found these would not be acceptable in this country [ the U.S. ] .
Then we decided to incorporate a hexagon socket into the screw [ … ] .
" Hallowell does not elaborate on why SPS found that the square hole " would not be acceptable in this country " , but it seems likely that it would have to have involved licensing Robertson 's patent , which would have defeated SPS 's purpose of driving down its cost for internal - wrenching screws ( and may have been unavailable at any price , as explained at " List of screw drives > Robertson " ) .
The story , if any , of whether SPS 's methods required licensing of Allen 's 1910 patent is not addressed by Hallowell 's memoir .
The book does not mention which method — cold forming or linear broaching — was used by SPS in these earliest years .
If the latter was used , then Allen 's patent would not have been relevant .
Soon after SPS had begun producing the [ hex ] socket head set screw , Hallowell had the idea to make a [ hex ] socket head cap screw ( SHCS ) .
Hallowell said , " Up to this moment none of us had ever seen a socket head cap screw , and what I am about to relate concerns what I believe was the first socket head cap screw ever made in this country [ the U.S. ] .
" SPS gave their line of screws the Unbrako brand name , chosen for its echoing of the word unbreakable .
Hallowell said that acceptance of the internal - wrenching hexagon drive was slow at first ( painfully slow for SPS 's sales ) , but that it eventually caught on quite strongly .
This adoption occurred first in tool and die work and later in other manufacturing fields such as defense ( aircraft , tanks , submarines ) , civilian aircraft , automobiles , bicycles , furniture and others .
Concerning the dissemination of the screws and wrenches , Hallowell said that " the transition from a square head set screw
[ Hallowell refers here to the then - ubiquitous external - wrenching square drive ] to a hexagon socket head hollow set screw [ , ] for which had to be developed special keys or wrenches for tightening or loosening the screw , was the cause of more profanity among the mechanics and machine manufacturers than any other single event that happened .
[ … ] I am sure that the old - timers who read this book will remember this period vividly . "
( These transitional growing pains echo those experienced many decades later with the adoption of the Torx drive ) .
World War II , with its unprecedented push for industrial production of every kind , is probably the event that first put most laypersons in contact with the internal - wrenching hexagon drive .
( Popular Science magazine would note in 1946 that " Cap screws and setscrews with heads recessed to take hexagonal - bar wrenches are coming into increasing use . " )
It appears that the internal - wrenching hexagon drive may have been independently reinvented in various countries .
At the least , the design ( or methods of manufacturing it ) was patented in various countries by various patentees , and its name varies .
There is another name in Italian ( brugola ) , stemming from the name Officine Egidio Brugola , a company who first commercialized Allen 's products in Italy .
HEX KEY STANDARD SIZES Section::::Hex key standard sizes .
Hex keys are measured across - flats ( AF ) , which is the distance between two opposite ( parallel ) flat sides of the key .
Using a hex wrench on a socket that is too large may result in damage to the fastener or the tool .
An example would be using a 5 mm tool in a 5.5 mm socket .
Because hex - style hardware and tools are available in both metric and Imperial and customary sizes ( the latter sometimes labelled " SAE " ) , it is also possible to select a tool that is too small for the fastener by using an Imperial / customary tool on a metric fastener , or the converse .
There are some exceptions to that .
For example , 4 mm keys are almost exactly the same size as 5/32 " , and 8 mm keys are almost exactly the same size as 5/16 " , which makes 4 mm and 8 mm preferred numbers for consumer products such as self - assembly furniture , because end users can successfully use an imperial key on a metric fastener , or vice versa , without stripping .
19 mm keys are so close to the same size as ¾ " that they are completely interchangeable in practical use .
METRIC SIZES
Section::::Metric sizes .
Standard metric sizes are defined in ISO 2936:2001
" Assembly tools for screws and nuts — Hexagon socket screw keys " , also known as DIN 911 , and , measured in millimeters ( mm ) are : * 0.7 , 0.9 , 1.0 , 1.25 , 1.3 , 1.5 * 2 to 6 in 0.5 mm increments , sometimes incorrectly referred to as M2 to M6 which rather should refer to thread sizes ( see below for M1 , M2 style designation ) .
* 7 to 22 in 1 mm increments
* 24 , 25 , 27 , 30 , 32 , 36 , 42 and 46 mm .
Metric hex wrench sizes are sometimes incorrectly referred to using the designation " M " followed by the size in millimeters of the tool or socket , e.g. " M6 " , although this may be confused with the standard use of " M6 " which refers to the size of a metric screw or bolt .
Table of some common metric hex key sizes from 0.7 to 10 mm .
Italic values are rounded .
: ISO metric threads ( M - threads ) 2nd choice sizes are rarely used .
INCH SIZES Section::::Inch sizes .
American sizes are defined in ANSI / ASME standard B18.3 - 1998 " Socket Cap , Shoulder , and Set Screws ( Inch Series ) " .
Table of some common SAE hex key sizes from 0.028 " to 3/8 " .
Italic values are rounded .
:
VARIANTS Section::::Variants .
A security version of the hex head includes a pin in the center .
These fasteners are said to have a " center pin reject " feature to prevent standard hex wrenches from working .
A special driver must be used to fasten or remove these fasteners .
The TORX head 's security variant also has such a pin for the same reason .
Some hex keys have a ball on one end , which allows the tool to be used at an angle off - axis to the screw .
This type of hex key was invented in 1964 by the Bondhus Corporation , and is now manufactured by several other companies .
While providing access to otherwise inaccessible fasteners , thinning of the tool shaft to create the ball shape renders it weaker than the straight - shaft version , limiting the torque that can be applied .
The tool also makes point contact with the fastener as opposed to the line contact seen in the straight style tools .
MANUFACTURING METHODS
* Hex socket screw heads are usually made by stamping the head with a die , plastically deforming the metal .
Other ways to generate the hex socket include linear broaching and rotary broaching .
Broaching the heads with a linear broach is essentially the metalworking analog of mortising wood with a mortising machine ; a hole is drilled and then the corners are broached out .
This operation often leaves little telltale curled chips still attached at the bottom of the socket .
These are negligible for most applications .
* Hex keys are made by imparting the hexagon cross - section to steel wire ( for example , with a drawing die ) , then bending and shearing .
SEE ALSO
* Wrench * List of screw drives REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY EXTERNAL LINKS * Hex Keys ( Allen Keys ) and Bits Sockets Dimensions