UBER EATS Uber Eats ( previously stylized as UberEATS ) is an American online food ordering and delivery platform launched by Uber in 2014 and based in San Francisco , California .
Users can order food from participating restaurants on their website or with a smartphone / tablet application ( only iOS and Android ) .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Uber was founded in 2009 by Garrett Camp ( also the founder of StumbleUpon ) , and Travis Kalanick .
The company made its foray into food delivery in August , 2014 with the launch of the UberFRESH service in Santa Monica , California .
In 2015 , the platform was renamed to UberEATS , and the ordering software was released as its own application , separate from their app for Uber rides .
At the same time , they expanded the platform to include Barcelona , Chicago , and New York City .
UberEATS continued to expand throughout the second half of 2015 .
As of 2018 , the service is at " ... a $ 6 billion bookings run rate , growing over 200 percent .
" UberEATS is now located in 250 cities with over 300 more locations needed to be equal to Uber .
OPERATION Section::::Operation .
Users can read the menu , order , and pay for food from participating resturaunts using their device using a application on the iOS or Android platforms or through a web browser .
Users additionally have the option of giving a tip for delivery .
The app detects the user 's location and displays restaurants open at the time separately from those that are closed .
Payment is charged to a credit / debit card on file with Uber .
Meals are delivered by couriers using cars , bikes , or on foot .
Upon ordering , the customer is notified of the total price combining delivery fee and meal price .
Customers can track the delivery status after the order is placed .
As of August 2018 , Uber Eats changed its flat $ 4.99 delivery fee rate to varying fee according to the distances .
The fee ranges from $ 2 to $ 8 as the minimum and maximum rate varying according to the distance covered by delivery services .
The platform occasionally features food from local celebrity chefs wishing to increase their public visibility , including some who do not have physical restaurants .
Depending on the city , people can sign up to deliver food orders for Uber Eats using their car , bike , scooter , or on foot .
Delivery partners earn money for each delivery trip based on number of trips and the distance between the restaurant and the dropoff location .
In most cities , partners must be 19 years of age or older in order to participate .
Uber drivers who currently provide rides for Uber are also able to sign up to do delivery .
SEE ALSO
* Ghost restaurant * Timeline of Uber REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS