SAINT MARIE ( FICTIONAL ISLAND )
Saint Marie is a fictional island in the Lesser Antilles which serves as the setting for the BBC crime drama television series Death in Paradise .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
Saint Marie is described in Episode 3.3 as a " pretty island " that is " situated in the Eastern Caribbean Sea " and " one - tenth the size of its north - west neighbour Guadeloupe " , which would make Saint Marie about in size .
It is described in Episode 4.5 as being 70 miles from Martinique .
The island is a British Overseas Territory , but was handed over to the British from the French only in the 1970s , so that about 30 % of its people are French citizens , with the French language still widely spoken .
The back - story appears to be a blend of two real - world islands near to Guadeloupe , with size and location aligning with Marie - Galante ( in real - life politically affiliated with Guadeloupe , not independent of it ) , and history and language aligning with Dominica .
Another possible basis is Îlet Sainte Marie
" The is an island located on the northeast coast of Martinique , right in front of the small town of Sainte - Marie , known in the North Atlantic region .
Very popular with tourists , it is a geological curiosity of nature , as connected to the rest of the island by a tombolo . "
In Episode 5.2 a map can be seen with Puerto Rico in the northwest and Dominica in the southeast of the map , Saint Marie , in addition to another fictional island , Saint Robert , are present on the map , it would appear that there is significantly more distance between Guadelope and Dominica in the Death in Paradise universe , Saint Robert appears similar in shape , and slightly smaller in size than , Dominica , although rotated by about 100 - 110 degrees anti - clockwise ; although inconsistent with other in - universe statements Saint Marie appears about the same size as Dominica , and much larger than Marie - Galante .
Marie - Galante , Saint - Marie , Spinner 's Rock ( a small islet relevant to this episode ) , and Saint Robert can be described as being on a straight line between Guadelope and Dominica in that order from the most northern to the most southern .
Both Marie - Galante and Dominica are present , thus ruling out the possibilities of these two as candidates for Saint - Marie .
They drive on the same side of the road as the UK , but vehicles , including the police Land Rover Defender 110 , have number plates the same format as the vehicle registration plates of France .
FEATURES Section::::Features .
Saint Marie 's population is assumed to be around 10,000 .
In the series , Saint Marie has a volcano , rainforest , sugar plantations , a fishing harbour , an airport , a university , a convent , multiple hotels , approximately 100 public beaches , and a Crown Court .
It also has its own newspaper , The Saint Marie Times .
Honoré , the main town , has a leisure / commercial marina , market , bars , and restaurants as well as the police station .
The neighbouring town to Honoré is named as Port Royal .
Its main economic ties are to Guadeloupe , the UK , and France , but it uses the East Caribbean Dollar as its unit of currency , as opposed to the Pound or the Euro .
The island 's main religions are Catholicism and Voodoo , with several religious festivals featuring in the programme , including the Saint Ursula Festival ( in reality , a major festival of the Virgin Islands ) and some Voodoo festivals .
LOCATIONS Section::::Locations .
The series is filmed on Guadeloupe , and Deshaies doubles for the fictional town of Honoré .
REFERENCES