EGG DROP SOUP
Egg drop soup ( traditional : 蛋花湯 ; pinyin : dànhuātāng ; literally " egg flower soup " ) is a Chinese soup of wispy beaten eggs in boiled chicken broth .
Condiments such as black pepper or white pepper , and finely chopped scallions and tofu are optional , but commonly added to the soup .
The soup is finished by adding a thin stream of beaten eggs to the boiling broth in the final moments of cooking , creating thin , silken strands or flakes of cooked egg that float in the soup .
Egg drop soup using different recipes is known to be a simple - to - prepare soup in different East Asian and Western countries .
AMERICAN CHINESE CUISINE Section::::American Chinese cuisine .
In the United States , egg drop soup is often one of the main soups offered in American Chinese cuisine , and is also called egg flower soup .
Cornstarch may be used to thicken it .
MAINLAND CHINESE
CUISINE
Section::::Mainland Chinese cuisine .
In Chinese cuisine , egg drop soups have a thinner consistency than most common Western variants .
Depending on the region , they may be garnished with ingredients such as tofu , scallion , bean sprouts and corn .
JAPANESE CUISINE
Section::::Japanese cuisine .
In Japan , egg is often dropped unscrambled as the topping for tsukimi ( ) udon or soba .
The moon - like appearance of the whole yolk is responsible for the name , which means " moon viewing . "
WESTERN CUISINE Section::::Western cuisine .
In Italy , stracciatella , a version made of egg and parmesan cheese , is a popular variant of egg drop soup .
Similarly in France le tourin , a garlic soup , is made with egg whites which are drizzled into the soup in a similar way to how traditional egg drop soup is made .
Also in Spain , the similar and traditional sopa de ajo ( literally " garlic soup " ) uses egg whites to thicken the broth in a similar fashion .
In Austria , egg drop soup ( Eierflockensuppe or Eierflöckchensuppe ) is a simple , traditional recipe generally made for very young children or sick people .
Scrambled eggs are mixed with flour and then poured into boiling soup in order to make small egg dumplings .
Spices can be added to the egg - flour mixture according to taste .
A similar recipe exists in Polish cuisine ( kluski lane , lit . "
poured noodles " ) , with the egg - flour mixture either poured directly into soup , or into boiling water , then strained and added to a soup or sauce .
For children , often simmering milk ( optionally with sugar ) is used in place of soup .
In Russia , semolina is usually boiled in the chicken stock before the eggs are whisked in for the more substantial fare , and flavored with chopped scallion and black pepper .
A simple egg dough dumplings similar to lazy vareniki or the Ukrainian halushky are a frequent addition in the southern regions .
In Cyprus and Greece the egg is beaten and then slowly stirred in the soup so it does not curdle .
Lemon and rice are the additional ingredients besides the chicken stock to make Avgolemono .
SEE ALSO
* Chicken and dumplings * Chinese cuisine * Corn crab soup
* Dumpling * Egg tongsui *
Hot and sour soup
* List of Chinese soups * Miso soup * Wonton soup REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS