OUTSIDERS ( U.S. TV SERIES )
Outsiders is an American television drama series created by Peter Mattei .
Set in the fictional town of Blackburg , Crockett County , Kentucky , the series tells the story of the Farrell clan and their struggle for power and control in the hills of Appalachia .
It is WGN America 's third original series , which debuted on January 26 , 2016 .
On March 11 , 2016 , WGN America renewed Outsiders for a second season which premiered on January 24 , 2017 .
On April 14 , 2017 , WGN America announced , the series had been canceled after two seasons , with the then forthcoming last episode of the second season , airing as a series finale on the channel .
SYNOPSIS
Section::::Synopsis .
Set in the Appalachian Mountains of Kentucky , the series revolves around the interaction of a group of mountain folk known as the Farrell clan and the locals in the nearby town of Blackburg , Kentucky .
The Farrells are an isolationist group , who shun normal society and live a spartan existence in the woods .
Extremely paranoid of outsiders , the family controls a mountain coveted by a national mining outfit for its coal deposits .
At the start of the series , Asa Farrell , a cousin of the ruling family , returns to the mountains after leaving ten years prior in order to join the military and experience life amongst normal society .
His arrival coincides with the family matriarch Lady Ray Farrell announcing her intention to cede power to her son , " Big Foster " Farrell .
Big Foster , who never forgave Asa for leaving his family , has Asa imprisoned in a cage for six months until he is freed due to his ability to read after an eviction notice is posted at the entrance of the mountain .
In town , the mining company has gained approval to evict the Farrell family from the mountain and seeks to expedite the process so mining operations can begin as soon as possible .
Deputy Sheriff Wade Houghton is assigned the task to carry out the eviction process .
Deputy Sheriff Houghton however , suffers from alcoholism , opiate addiction , and PTSD due to previous encounters with the violent and cold - blooded Farrell family , and the death of his wife .
Houghton attempts to warn his superiors that any sort of eviction process will be bloody , result in loss of life on both sides , and will eventually devolve into a lengthy siege with the Farrells holding the advantage through their extensive knowledge of the mountains .
The eviction leads to a power struggle , as Lady Ray believes that the impending eviction is the apocalyptic event that the family believes in per a family prophecy .
Because of this , she pardons Asa , freeing him from the cage and announces a delay in turning over authority to her son .
She continues to refuse to change her mind when Big Foster , upset at being denied power , arranges a raid in town of a local mobster that goes bad and costs the life of Big Foster 's youngest son .
CAST MAIN * David Morse as " Big Foster " Farrell VI , the most powerful male on the hill , and next in line to be Bren'in , the Farrells ' leader .
When denied his right of ascension , Farrell takes dangerous action to secure his power and to try to eliminate Asa , whom he considers to be a traitor to his family .
* Joe Anderson as Asa Farrell , Big Foster 's cousin , who left the mountains to join the military and returns home after a ten - year absence .
He was once in love with Lil Foster 's lover G'Win , which creates tension as she attempts to help reintegrate him into the tribe .
* Gillian Alexy as G'Winveer
" G'Win " Farrell , Asa 's third cousin and former lover .
Currently involved with " Lil Foster " , but seeks to help her former lover return to the family .
Had a child who is now deceased with ' Lil ' Foster .
* Ryan Hurst as " Lil Foster " Farrell VIII , Big Foster 's eldest son and enforcer and current boyfriend of G'Win .
* Kyle Gallner as Hasil Farrell , Asa 's fourth cousin , who was maimed by Big Foster after he stole some of the family 's wine / moonshine to give to a drug dealer , who bought Hasil a drink when he snuck into town one night .
Having lived most of his life on the mountain , Hasil wishes to know more about the civilized world , much to Big Foster 's anger and dismay .
He 's fallen in love with Sally - Ann , a black resident of Blackburg .
* Christina Jackson as Sally - Ann , one of the few African - American residents in Blackburg .
Sally - Ann strikes up a relationship with Hasil , much to the anger of her brother , who does not want his sister to associate with a white man .
* Thomas M. Wright as Deputy Sheriff Wade Houghton ,
Jr. A fifth - generation Houghton to live in Blackburg , second - in - command of the local sheriff 's department , and a single father , Houghton is given the assignment of evicting the Farrells from their mountain fortress , a task he fears due to a past encounter his father , a coal company line boss , had with the Farrells that Wade believed caused his father 's death .
This incident led to Wade developing a great fear of the mountain clan .
Suffers from PTSD and alcoholism , and takes unprescribed pills as a result of said encounter .
RECURRING
* Phyllis Somerville as Lady Ray Farrell , Big Foster 's dead mother and the former Bren'in .
Believed by the members of her clan to have special abilities .
* Jason McCune as Ned Osborn * Francie Swift as Haylie Grimes * Mark Jeffrey Miller as Craigan " Krake " O'Farrell , runner of the still and maker of Farrell Wine * Eddie Beveridge as Phil'up Farrell * Keith Michael Gregory as Jake Murphy
* Johanna McGinley as Annalivia Farrell , the caretaker to the Lady Bren'in .
* Barret Hackney as Butch the town drug dealer
* Kendall Yeaman as Phelia Farrell , The eyes and ears of the Farrell Clan PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The series , first titled Titans , was created by playwright Peter Mattei , and produced by Peter Tolan and Paul Giamatti for Sony Pictures Television and Tribune Studios .
WGN America announced a 13-episode straight - to - series order in August 2014 .
Production began in the Pittsburgh metropolitan area on May 5 , 2015 and ran through September .
Mountaintop exteriors were filmed in Henry Kaufmann Family Park in Monroeville , Pennsylvania , while interiors were constructed at 31st Street Studios in the Strip District .
Scenes in Blackburg , Kentucky , the fictional town at the base of the mountain , were filmed in Millvale .
WGN America renewed the series for a second season .
Production resumed in mid-2016 using the same locations around Pittsburgh .
SERIES OVERVIEW
Section::::Series overview .
EPISODES
SEASON 1
( 2016 )
SEASON 2 ( 2017 )
RECEPTION REVIEWS
Section::::Reception .
Section::::Reviews .
On review aggregator Metacritic , Outsiders holds a score of 63/100 , based on 17 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews . "
On Rotten Tomatoes , the first season has an approval rating of 78 % , stating " Outsiders gritty performances keeps the backwoods drama intriguing , even when the story gets stuck in the mud . " REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS