GRAM FLOUR Gram flour or chickpea flour or besan (;
; ) , is a pulse flour made from a variety of ground chickpea known as Bengal gram .
It is a staple ingredient in the cuisine of the Indian subcontinent , including in Indian , Bangladeshi , Burmese , Nepali , Pakistani and Sri Lankan cuisines .
Gram flour can be made from either raw or roasted gram beans .
The roasted variety is more flavourful , while the raw variety has a slightly bitter taste .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
Gram flour contains a high proportion of carbohydrates , higher fiber relative to other flours , no gluten , and a higher proportion of protein than other flours .
DISHES INDIA Section::::Dishes .
Section::::India .
Gram flour is in popular use in the Indian subcontinent , where it is used to make the following :
In Andhra Pradesh , it is used in a curry with gram flour cakes called Senaga Pindi Kura ( ) and is eaten with Chapati or Puri , mostly during winter for breakfast .
Chila ( or chilla ) , a pancake made with gram flour batter , is a popular street food in India .
SOUTHEAST AND EAST ASIA
* Burmese tofu *
Jidou liangfen
SOUTHERN EUROPE Section::::Southern Europe .
Along the coast of the Ligurian Sea , flour made from garbanzo beans , which are a different variety of chickpea closely related to Bengal gram , is used to make a thin pancake that is baked in the oven .
This popular street food is called farinata in Italian cuisine , fainâ in Genoa , and is known as socca or cade in French cuisine .
It is used to make panelle , a fritter in Sicilian cuisine .
In Spanish cuisine , gram flour is an ingredient for tortillitas de camarones .
Also in Cyprus and Greece , it is used as a garnishing ingredient for the funeral ritual food Koliva , blessed and eaten during Orthodox Memorial services .
NORTH AFRICA Section::::North Africa .
In Morocco , they make a dish called karan from gram flour and eggs , which is baked in the oven .
A similar famous dish is prepared in Algeria called Garantita or Karantita ( believed to be originated from the Spanish term Calentica , which means hot ) .
OTHER USES
Section::::Other uses .
In the form of a paste with water or dahi ( yogurt ) , it is also popular as a facial exfoliant in the Indian Subcontinent .
When mixed with an equal proportion of water , it can be used as an egg replacement in vegan cooking .
SEE ALSO
* List of chickpea dishes
* Oralu kallu , a type of grinding machine using stone to produce flour in some parts of India NOTES