SOLANACEAE
The Solanaceae , or nightshades , are an economically important family of flowering plants .
The family ranges from annual and perennial herbs to vines , lianas , epiphytes , shrubs , and trees , and includes a number of important agricultural crops , medicinal plants , spices , weeds , and ornamentals .
Many members of the family contain potent alkaloids , and some are highly toxic , but many , including tomatoes , potatoes , eggplant , bell / chili peppers , and tobacco are widely used .
The family belongs to the order Solanales , in the asterid group and class Magnoliopsida ( dicotyledons ) .
The Solanaceae consists of about 98 genera and some 2,700 species , with a great diversity of habitats , morphology and ecology .
The name Solanaceae derives from the genus Solanum , " the nightshade plant " .
The etymology of the Latin word is unclear .
The name may come from a perceived resemblance of certain solanaceous flowers to the sun and its rays .
At least one species of Solanum is known as the " sunberry " .
Alternatively , the name could originate from the Latin verb solare , meaning " to soothe " , presumably referring to the soothing pharmacological properties of some of the psychoactive species of the family .
The family has a worldwide distribution , being present on all continents except Antarctica .
The greatest diversity in species is found in South America and Central America .
In 2017 , scientists reported on their discovery and analysis of a fossil tomatillo found in the Patagonian region of Argentina , dated to 52 million years B.P.
The finding has pushed back the earliest appearance of the plant family Solanaceae .
As tomatillos likely developed later than other nightshades , this may mean that the Solanaceae may have first developed during the Mesozoic Era .
The Solanaceae include a number of commonly collected or cultivated species .
The most economically important genus of the family is Solanum , which contains the potato ( S. tuberosum , in fact , another common name of the family is the " potato family " ) , the tomato ( S. lycopersicum ) , and the eggplant or aubergine ( S. melongena ) .
Another important genus , Capsicum , produces both chili peppers and bell peppers .
The genus Physalis produces the so - called groundcherries , as well as the tomatillo ( Physalis philadelphica ) , the Cape gooseberry and the Chinese lantern .
The genus Lycium contains the boxthorns and the wolfberry Lycium barbarum .
Nicotiana contains , among other species , tobacco .
Some other important members of Solanaceae include a number of ornamental plants such as Petunia , Browallia , and Lycianthes , and sources of psychoactive alkaloids , Datura , Mandragora ( mandrake ) , and Atropa belladonna ( deadly nightshade ) .
Certain species are widely known for their medicinal uses , their psychotropic effects , or for being poisonous .
Most of the economically important genera are contained in the subfamily Solanoideae , with the exceptions of tobacco ( Nicotiana tabacum , Nicotianoideae ) and petunia ( Petunia × hybrida , Petunioideae ) .
Many of the Solanaceae , such as tobacco and petunia , are used as model organisms in the investigation of fundamental biological questions at the cellular , molecular , and genetic levels .
ETYMOLOGY AND PRONUNCIATION Section::::Etymology and pronunciation .
The name " Solanaceae " ( ) comes to international scientific vocabulary from New Latin , from Solanum , the type genus , + -aceae , a standardized suffix for plant family names in modern taxonomy .
The genus name comes from the Classical Latin word solanum , referring to nightshades ( especially Solanum nigrum ) , " probably from sol , ' sun ' , + -anum , neuter of -anus . "
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
Plants in the Solanaceae can take the form of herbs , shrubs , trees , vines and lianas , and sometimes epiphytes .
They can be annuals , biennials , or perennials , upright or decumbent .
Some have subterranean tubers .
They do not have laticifers , nor latex , nor coloured saps .
They can have a basal or terminal group of leaves or neither of these types .
The leaves are generally alternate or alternate to opposed ( that is , alternate at the base of the plant and opposed towards the inflorescence ) .
The leaves can be herbaceous , leathery , or transformed into spines .
The leaves are generally petiolate or subsessile , rarely sessile .
They are frequently inodorous , but on occasions , they are aromatic or fetid .
The foliar lamina can be either simple or compound , and the latter can be either pinnatifid or ternate .
The leaves have reticulated venation and lack a basal meristem .
The laminae are generally dorsiventral and lack secretory cavities .
The stomata are generally confined to one of a leaf 's two sides ; they are rarely found on both sides .
The flowers are generally hermaphrodites , although some are monoecious , andromonoecious , or dioecious species ( such as some Solanum or Symonanthus ) .
Pollination is entomophilous .
The flowers can be solitary or grouped into terminal , cymose , or axillary inflorescences .
The flowers are medium - sized , fragrant ( Nicotiana ) , fetid ( Anthocercis ) , or inodorous .
The flowers are usually actinomorphic , slightly zygomorphic , or markedly zygomorphic ( for example , in flowers with a bilabial corolla in Schizanthus species ) .
The irregularities in symmetry can be due to the androecium , to the perianth , or both at the same time .
In the great majority of species , the flowers have a differentiated perianth with a calyx and corolla ( with five sepals and five petals , respectively ) an androecium with five stamens and two carpels forming a gynoecium with a superior ovary ( they are therefore referred to as pentamers and tetracyclic ) .
The stamens are epipetalous and are typically present in multiples of four or five , most commonly four or eight .
They usually have a hypogynous disk .
The calyx is gamosepalous ( as the sepals are joined together forming a tube ) , with the ( 4)5(6 ) segments equal , it has five lobes , with the lobes shorter than the tube , it is persistent and often accrescent .
The corolla usually has five petals that are also joined together forming a tube .
Flower shapes are typically rotate ( wheel - shaped , spreading in one plane , with a short tube ) or tubular ( elongated cylindrical tube ) , campanulated or funnel - shaped .
The androecium has ( 2)(4)5(6 ) free stamens within it , oppositsepals ( that is , they alternate with the petals ) , they are usually fertile or , in some cases ( for example in Salpiglossideae )
they have staminodes .
In the latter case , there is usually either one staminode ( Salpiglossis ) or three ( Schizanthus ) .
The anthers touch on their upper end forming a ring , or they are completely free , dorsifixed , or basifixed with poricide dehiscence or through small longitudinal cracks .
The stamen 's filament can be filliform or flat .
The stamens can be inserted inside the coralline tube or exserted .
The plants demonstrate simultaneous microsporogenesis , the microspores are tetrad , tetrahedral , or isobilateral .
The pollen grains are bicellular at the moment of dehiscence , usually open and angular .
The gynoecium is bicarpelar ( rarely three- or five - locular ) with a superior ovary and two locules , which may be secondarily divided by false septa , as is the case for Nicandreae and Datureae .
The gynoecium is located in an oblique position relative to the flower 's median plane .
They have one style and one stigma ; the latter is simple or bilobate .
Each locule has one to 50 ovules that are anatropous or hemianatropous with axillar placentation .
The development of the embryo sack can be the same as for Polygonum or Allium species .
The embryo sack 's nuclear poles become fused before fertilization .
The three antipodes are usually ephemeral or persistent as in the case of Atropa .
The fruit can be a berry as in the case of the tomato or wolfberry a dehiscent capsule as in Datura , or a drupe .
The fruit has axial placentation .
The capsules are normally septicidal or rarely loculicidal or valvate .
The seeds are usually endospermic , oily ( rarely starchy ) , and without obvious hairs .
The seeds of most Solanaceae are round and flat , about in diameter .
The embryo can be straight or curved , and has two cotyledons .
Most species in the Solanaceae have 2n=24 chromosomes , but the number may be a higher multiple of 12 due to polyploidy .
Wild potatoes , of which there are about 200 , are predominantly diploid ( 2 × 12 = 24 chromosomes ) , but triploid ( 3 × 12 = 36 chromosomes ) , tetraploid ( 4 × 12 = 48 chromosomes ) , pentaploid ( 5 × 12 = 60 ) and even hexaploid ( 6 × 12 = 72 chromosome ) species or populations exist .
The cultivated species Solanum tuberosum has 4 × 12 = 48 chromosomes .
Some Capsicum species have 2 × 12 = 24 chromosomes , while others have 26 chromosomes .
DIVERSITY OF CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Diversity of characteristics .
Despite the previous description , the Solanaceae exhibit a large morphological variability , even in their reproductive characteristics .
Examples of this diversity include : *
The number of carpels that form the gynoecium
In general , the Solanaceae have a gynoecium ( the female part of the flower ) formed of two carpels .
However , Melananthus has a monocarpelar gynoecium , there are three or four carpels in Capsicum , three to five in Nicandra , some species of Jaborosa and Trianaea and four carpels in Iochroma umbellatum .
*
The number of locules in the ovary The number of locules in the ovary is usually the same as the number of carpels .
However , some species occur in which the numbers are not the same due to the existence of false septa ( internal walls that subdivide each locule ) , such as in Datura and some members of the Lycieae ( the genera Grabowskia and Vassobia ) .
* Type of ovules and their number
The ovules are generally inverted , folded sharply backwards ( anatropous ) , but some genera have ovules that are rotated at right angles to their stalk ( campilotropous ) as in Phrodus , Grabowskia or Vassobia ) , or are partially inverted ( hemitropous as in Cestrum , Capsicum , Schizanthus and Lycium ) .
The number of ovules per locule also varies from a few ( two pairs in each locule in Grabowskia , one pair in each locule in Lycium ) and very occasionally only one ovule is in each locule as for example in Melananthus .
* The type of fruit
The fruits of the great majority of the Solanaceae are berries or capsules ( including pyxidia ) and less often drupes .
Berries are common in the subfamilies Cestroideae , Solanoideae ( with the exception of Datura , Oryctus , Grabowskia and the tribe Hyoscyameae ) and the tribe Juanulloideae ( with the exception of Markea ) .
Capsules are characteristic of the subfamilies Cestroideae ( with the exception of Cestrum ) and Schizanthoideae , the tribes Salpiglossoideae and Anthocercidoideae , and the genus Datura .
The tribe Hyoscyameae has pyxidia .
Drupes are typical of the Lycieae tribe and in Iochrominae .
ALKALOIDS Section::::Alkaloids .
Alkaloids are nitrogenous organic substances produced by plants as a secondary metabolite and which have an intense physiological action on animals even at low doses .
Solanaceae are known for having a diverse range of alkaloids .
To humans , these alkaloids can be desirable , toxic , or both .
The tropanes are the most well - known of the alkaloids found in the Solanaceae .
The plants that contain these substances have been used for centuries as poisons .
However , despite being recognized as poisons , many of these substances have invaluable pharmaceutical properties .
Many species contain a variety of alkaloids that can be more or less active or poisonous , such as scopolamine , atropine , hyoscyamine , and nicotine .
They are found in plants such as the henbane ( Hyoscyamus albus ) , belladonna ( Atropa belladonna ) , datura or jimson ( Datura stramonium ) , mandrake ( Mandragora autumnalis ) , tobacco , and others .
Some of the main types of alkaloids are :
* Solanine : A toxic glycoalkaloid with a bitter taste , it has the formula CHNO .
It is formed by the alkaloid solanidine with a carbohydrate side chain .
It is found in leaves , fruit , and tubers of various Solanaceae such as the potato and tomato .
Its production is thought to be an adaptive defence strategy against herbivores .
Substance intoxication from solanine is characterized by gastrointestinal disorders ( diarrhoea , vomiting , abdominal pain ) and neurological disorders ( hallucinations and headache ) .
The median lethal dose is between 2 and 5 mg per kg of body weight .
Symptoms become manifest 8 to 12 hr after ingestion .
The amount of these glycoalkaloids in potatoes , for example , varies significantly depending on environmental conditions during their cultivation , the length of storage , and the variety .
The average glycoalkaloid concentration is 0.075 mg / g of potato .
Solanine has occasionally been responsible for poisonings in people who ate berries from species such as Solanum nigrum or Solanum dulcamara , or green potatoes .
* Tropanes : The term " tropane " comes from a genus in which they are found , Atropa ( the belladonna genus ) .
Atropa is named after the Greek Fate , Atropos , who cut the thread of life .
This nomenclature reflects its toxicity and lethality .
They are bicyclic organic nitrogen compounds ( IUPAC nomenclature : 8-Methyl-8-azabicyclo[3.2.1]octane ) , with the chemical formula of CHN .
These alkaloids include , among others , atropine , cocaine , scopolamine , and hyoscyamine .
They are found in various species , such as mandrake ( Mandragora autumnalis ) , black henbane or stinking nightshade ( Hyoscyamus niger ) , belladonna ( Atropa belladonna ) the stramonium ( Datura stramonium ) and Brugmansia species , as well as many others in the family Solanaceae .
Pharmacologically , they are the most powerful known anticholinergics in existence , meaning they inhibit the neurological signals transmitted by the endogenous neurotransmitter , acetylcholine .
More commonly , they can halt many types of allergic reactions .
Symptoms of overdose may include dry mouth , dilated pupils , ataxia , urinary retention , hallucinations , convulsions , coma , and death .
Atropine , a commonly used ophthalmological agent , dilates the pupils and thus facilitates examination of the interior of the eye .
In fact , juice from the berries of A. belladonna were used by Italian courtesans during the Renaissance to exaggerate the size of their eyes by causing the dilation of their pupils .
Despite the extreme toxicity of the tropanes , they are useful drugs when administered in extremely small dosages .
They can reverse cholinergic poisoning , which can be caused by overexposure to organophosphate insecticides and chemical warfare agents such as sarin and VX .
Scopolamine ( found in Hyoscyamus muticus and Scopolia atropioides ) , is used as an antiemetic against motion sickness or for people suffering from nausea as a result of receiving chemotherapy .
Scopolamine and hyoscyamine are the most widely used tropane alkaloids in pharmacology and medicine due to their effects on the parasympathetic nervous system .
Atropine has a stimulant effect on the central nervous system and heart , whereas scopolamine has a sedative effect .
These alkaloids can not be substituted by any other class of compounds , so they are still in demand .
This is one of the reasons for the development of an active field of research into the metabolism of the alkaloids , the enzymes involved , and the genes that produce them .
Hyoscyamine 6-β hydroxylase , for example , catalyses the hydroxylation of hyoscyamine that leads to the production of scopolamine at the end of the tropane 's biosynthetic pathway .
This enzyme has been isolated and the corresponding gene cloned from three species : H. niger , A. belladonna and B. candida .
* Nicotine : Nicotine ( IUPAC nomenclature ( S)-3-(1-methylpyrrolidin-2-yl ) pyridine ) is a pyrrolidine alkaloid produced in large quantities in the tobacco plant ( Nicotiana tabacum ) .
Edible Solanaceae such as eggplants , tomatoes , potatoes , and peppers also contain nicotine , but at concentrations ~100,000–1,000,000
times less than tobacco .
Nicotine 's function in a plant is to act as a defense against herbivores , as it is a very effective neurotoxin , in particular against insects .
In fact , nicotine has been used for many years as an insecticide , though its use is currently being replaced by synthetic molecules derived from its structure .
At low concentrations , nicotine acts as a stimulant in mammals , which causes the dependency in smokers .
Like the tropanes , it acts on cholinergic neurons , but with the opposite effect ( it is an agonist as opposed to an antagonist ) .
It has a higher specificity for nicotinic acetylcholine receptors than other ACh proteins .
* Capsaicin : Capsaicin ( IUPAC nomenclature 8-methyl - N - vanillyl - trans-6-nonenamide ) is structurally different from nicotine and the tropanes .
It is found in species of the genus Capsicum , which includes chilies and habaneros and it is the active ingredient that determines the Scoville rating of these spices .
The compound is not noticeably toxic to humans .
However , it stimulates specific pain receptors in the majority of mammals , specifically those related to the perception of heat in the oral mucosa and other epithelial tissues .
When capsaicin comes into contact with these mucosae , it causes a burning sensation little different from a burn caused by fire .
Capsaicin affects only mammals , not birds .
Pepper seeds can survive the digestive tracts of birds ; their fruit becomes brightly coloured once its seeds are mature enough to germinate , thereby attracting the attention of birds that then distribute the seeds .
Capsaicin extract is used to make pepper spray , a useful deterrent against aggressive mammals .
DISTRIBUTION Section::::Distribution .
Even though members of the Solanaceae are found on all continents except Antarctica , the greatest variety of species are found in Central America and South America .
Centers of diversity also occur in Australia and Africa .
Solanaceae occupy a great number of different ecosystems , from deserts to rainforests , and are often found in the secondary vegetation that colonizes disturbed areas .
In general , plants in this family are of tropical and temperate distribution .
PLANT HOST Section::::Plant host .
The potato tuber moth ( Phthorimaea operculella ) is an oligophagous insect that prefers to feed on plants of the family Solanaceae , especially the potato plant ( Solanum tuberosum ) .
Female P. operculella use the leaves to lay their eggs and the hatched larvae will eat away at the mesophyll of the leaf .
After feeding on the foliage , the larvae will then delve down and feed on the tubers and roots of the plant .
TAXONOMY Section::::Taxonomy .
The following taxonomic synopsis of the Solanaceae , including subfamilies , tribes and genera , is based on the most recent molecular phylogenetics studies of the family : CESTROIDEAE ( BROWALLIOIDEAE ) Section::::Cestroideae ( Browallioideae ) .
This subfamily is characterised by the presence of pericyclic fibres , an androecium with four or five stamens , frequently didynamous .
The basic chromosome numbers are highly variable , from x=7 to x=13 .
The subfamily consists of eight genera ( divided into three tribes ) and about 195 species distributed throughout the Americas .
The genus Cestrum is the most important , as it contains 175 of the 195 species in the subfamily .
The Cestreae tribe is unusual because it includes taxa with long chromosomes ( from 7.21 to 11.511ʵm in length ) , when the rest of the family generally possesses short chromosomes ( for example between 1.5 and 3.52ʵm in the Nicotianoideae )
* Browallieae * Browallia , genus with six species distributed throughout the neotropic ecozone to Arizona in the United States
* Streptosolen , monotypic genus native to the Andes
* Cestreae tribe , three genera of woody plants , generally shrubs
* Cestrum , some 175 species distributed throughout the neotropic ecozone
* Sessea , 16 species from the Andes * Vestia , monotypic genus from Chile
* Salpiglossideae tribe
* Reyesia , four species , distributed throughout Argentina and Chile
* Salpiglossis , two species originating from southern South America GOETZEOIDEAE Section::::Goetzeoideae .
This subfamily is characterized by the presence of drupes as fruit and seeds with curved embryos and large fleshy cotyledons .
The basic chromosome number is x=13 .
It includes four genera and five species distributed throughout the Greater Antilles .
Some authors suggest their molecular data indicate the monotypic genera Tsoala should be included in this subfamily , endemic to Madagascar , and Metternichia to the southeast of Brazil .
Goetzeaceae is considered as a synonym of this subfamily .
* Coeloneurum , monotypic genus endemic to Hispaniola
*
Espadaea , monotypic , from Cuba
* Goetzea , includes two species from the Antilles
* Henoonia , monotypic , originating in Cuba PETUNIOIDEAE Section::::Petunioideae .
Molecular phylogenetics indicates that Petunioideae is the sister clade of the subfamilies with chromosome number x=12 ( Solanoideae and Nicotianoideae ) .
They contain calistegins , alkaloids similar to the tropanes .
The androecium is formed of four stamens ( rarely five ) , usually with two different lengths .
The basic chromosome number of this subfamily can be x=7 , 8 , 9 or 11 .
It consists of 13 genera and some 160 species distributed throughout Central and South America .
Molecular data suggest the genera originated in Patagonia .
Benthamiella , Combera , and Pantacantha form a clade that can be categorized as a tribe ( Benthamielleae ) that should be in the subfamily Goetzeoideae .
* Benthamiella , 12 species native to Patagonia
* Bouchetia , three neotropical species * Brunfelsia , around 45 species from the neotropics
* Combera , two species from Patagonia
* Fabiana , 15 species native to the Andes * Hunzikeria , three species from the southwest United States and Mexico
* Latua , one species from the south of Chile * Leptoglossis , seven species from western South America
* Nierembergia , 21 species from South America * Pantacantha , monospecific genus from Patagonia * Calibrachoa , consists of 32 species from the neotropics .
The morphological data suggest this genus should be included within the Petunia .
However , the molecular and cytogenetic data indicate both should be kept separate .
In fact , Calibrachoa has a basic chromosome number x=9 , while that of Petunia is x=7 .
* Petunia , 18 species from South America
* Plowmania , monotypic genus from Mexico and Guatemala SCHIZANTHOIDEAE Section::::Schizanthoideae .
The Schizanthoideae include annual and biennial plants with tropane alkaloids , without pericyclic fibres , with characteristic hair and pollen grains .
The flowers are zygomorphic .
The androecium has two stamens and three stamenodes , anther dehiscence is explosive .
In terms of fruit type , the Schizanthoidae retain the plesiomorphic fruit form of the family Solanaceae , capsules , which rely on an anemochorous , abiotic form of dispersal .
This is present in Schizanthoidae due both to the genetic constraints of early divergence ( see below ) as well as Schizanthus evolution and presence in open habitats .
The embryo is curved .
The basic chromosome number is x=10 .
Schizanthus is a somewhat atypical genus among the Solanaceae due to its strongly zygomorphic flowers and basic chromosome number .
Morphological and molecular data suggest Schizanthus is a sister genus to the other Solanaceae and diverged early from the rest , probably in the late Cretaceous or in the early Cenozoic , 50 million years ago .
The great diversity of flower types within Schizanthus has been the product of the species ' adaptation to the different types of pollinators that existed in the Mediterranean , high alpine , and desert ecosystems then present in Chile and adjacent areas of Argentina .
*
Schizanthus , 12 species originating from Chile . SCHWENCKIOIDEAE
Section::::Schwenckioideae .
Annual plants with pericyclic fibres , their flowers are zygomorphic
, the androecium has four didynamous stamens or three stamenodes ; the embryo is straight and short .
The basic chromosome number is x=12 .
It includes four genera and some 30 species distributed throughout South America .
* Heteranthia , one species from Brazil
* Melananthus , five species from Brazil , Cuba , and Guatemala
* Protoschwenckia , monotypic genus from Bolivia and Brazil , some molecular phylogenetic studies have suggested this genus has an uncertain taxonomic position within the subfamily * Schwenckia , 22 species distributed throughout the neotropical regions of America NICOTIANOIDEAE
* Anthocercideae :
This tribe , endemic to Australia , contains 31 species in seven genera .
Molecular phylogenetic studies of the tribe indicate it is the sister of Nicotiana , and the genera Anthocercis , Anthotroche , Grammosolen , and Symonanthus are monophyletic .
Some characteristics are also thought to be derived from within the tribe , such as the unilocular stamens with semicircular opercula , bracteolate flowers , and berries as fruit .
* Anthocercis , 10 species , Australia
* Anthotroche , four species , Australia
* Crenidium , monotypic genus , Australia
* Cyphanthera , 9 species , Australia * Duboisia , four species , Australia * Gramnosolen , two species , Australia
* Symonanthus , two species ,
Australia * Nicotianeae tribe * Nicotiana , genus widely distributed , with 52 American species , 23 Australian , and one African SOLANOIDEAE
*
Capsiceae
*
Capsicum includes 40 accepted neotropical species * Lycianthes , some 200 species distributed throughout America and Asia * Datureae , two genera are perfectly differentiated at both the morphological and molecular levels , Brugmansia includes tree species , while Datura contains herbs or shrubs , the latter genus can be divided into three sections : Stramonium , Dutra and Ceratocaulis .
Recent work suggests the need to create and include a third genus to accommodate the Bolivian shrub currently known as Iochroma cardenasianum q.v .
* Brugmansia , six species from the Andes * Datura , 12 neotropical species
* Hyoscyameae
* Anisodus , four species from China , India and the Himalayas
* Atropa , four Euro - Asiatic species
* Atropanthe , monotypic genus from China
* Hyoscyamus , 10 accepted species distributed from the Mediterranean to China
* Physochlaina , 6 accepted Euro - Asiatic species
* Przewalskia , one species from China *
Scopolia , disjointed distribution with one European species and another from Japan *
Jaboroseae * Jaborosa , genus that includes 23 species from South America .
* Solandreae * Subtribe Juanulloinae consists 10 genera of trees and epiphytic shrubs with a neotropical distribution .
Some of these genera ( Dyssochroma , Merinthopodium and Trianaea ) show a clear dependency on various species of bats both for pollination and dispersion of seeds .
* Dyssochroma , two species from the south of Brazil
* Ectozoma * Hawkesiophyton * Juanulloa , 11 species from South and Central America * Markea , 9 species from South and Central America
*
Merinthopodium three species originating from South America
*
Rahowardiana
* Schultesianthus , eight neotropical species
* Trianaea , six South American species
* Subtribe Solandrinae , a monotypical subtribe , differs from Juanulloinae in that its embryos have incumbent cotyledons and semi - inferior ovaries .
* Solandra , 10 species from the neotropical regions of America
* Lycieae has three genera of woody plants , which grow in arid or semiarid climates .
The cosmopolitan genus Lycium is the oldest in the tribe and it has the greatest morphological variability .
Molecular phylogenetic studies suggest both Grabowskia and Phrodus should be included in the Lycium , and this genus , along with Nolana and Sclerophylax , form a clade ( Lyciina ) , which currently lacks a taxonomic category .
The red fleshy berries dispersed by birds are the main type of fruit in Lycium .
The different types of fruit in this genus have evolved from the type of berry just mentioned to a drupe with a reduced number of seeds .
* Grabowskia , three species from South America
* Lycium , 83 cosmopolitan species
* Phrodus , two species endemic to the north of Chile
*
Mandragoreae tribe does not have a defined systematic position according to molecular phylogenetic studies .
* Mandragora , two species from Eurasia
* Nicandreae is a tribe with two South American genera .
Molecular phylogenetic studies indicate the genera are not interrelated nor are they related with other genera of the family , so their taxonomic position is uncertain .
* Exodeconus , six species from western South America * Nicandra , one species distributed throughout neotropical regions
* Nolaneae are mostly herbs and small shrubs with succulent leaves , they have very beautiful flowers that range from white to various shades of blue , their fruit is schizocarpal , giving rise to various nuts .
* Nolana , 89 species distributed throughout western South America
* Physaleae , is a large tribe that is the sister of Capsiceae .
* Subtribe Iochrominae , a clade within the Physaleae tribe .
contains 37 species , mainly distributed in the Andes , assigned to six genera .
The members of this subtribe are characterized by being woody shrubs or small trees with attractive tubular or rotated flowers .
They also possess great floral diversity , containing every type is present in the family .
Their flowers can be red , orange , yellow , green , blue , purple , or white .
The corolla can be tubular to rotated , with a variation of up to eight times in the length of the tube between the various species .
* Acnistus , one species distributed throughout the neotropics
* Dunalia , five species from the Andes * Iochroma , 24 species from the Andes * Saracha , two species from the Andes .
* Vassobia , two South American species
* Eriolarynx , three species from Argentina and Bolivia * Physalinae , a monophyletic subtribe , contains 10 genera and includes herbs or woody shrubs with yellow , white , or purple solitary axillary flowers pollinated by bees .
Once pollination occurs , the corolla falls and the calyx expands until it entirely covers the boll that is developing ( the calyx is called accrescent ) .
In many species , the calyx turns yellow or orange on maturity .
The berries contain many greenish to yellow - orange seeds , often with red or purple highlights .
* Brachistus , three species from Mexico and Central America * Chamaesaracha , has 10 species from Mexico and Central America .
* Leucophysalis , includes 3 species from the south west of the United States and Mexico .
* Margaranthus , with 1 species from Mexico .
* Oryctes , monotypic genus from the south west of the United States .
* Quincula with just 1 species from the south west of the United States and from Mexico .
* Physalis , the largest genus of the subtribe , with 85 species distributed through the tropical regions of the Americas and with 1 species in China .
* Witheringia , genus with 15 species from neotropical regions .
* Tzeltalia , genus segregated from Physalis , with 2 species distributed throughout Mexico and Guatemala .
* Darcyanthus , genus with just 1 species originating in Bolivia and Peru .
* Subtribe Salpichroinae , this is a subtribe of Physaleae that includes 16 American species distributed in 1 genera : * Nectouxia , monotypic genus that is endemic to Mexico .
* Salpichroa , genus with 15 species from the Andes and other regions of South America .
* Subtribe Withaninae , is a subtribe of Physaleae with a broad distribution , including 9 genera : * Archiphysalis , with 3 species from China and Japan .
* Athenaea , which includes 7 species from Brazil .
* Aureliana , with 5 species from South America .
* Mellissia , monotypic genus from Saint Helena with the common name Saint Helena Boxwood .
* Physalisastrum , with 9 Asiatic species .
* Tubocapsicum , with just one species endemic to China .
* Withania , with 10 species native to the Canary Islands , Africa and Nepal .
* Cuatresia , with 11 neotropical species .
Molecular studies indicate that this genus , along with Deprea and Larnax has an uncertain taxonomic position .
* Deprea , with 6 neotropical species .
* Larnax , many taxonomists consider it to be a synonym for Deprea , contains 22 species native to the Andes .
* Tribe Solaneae .
The genera Cyphomandra , Discopodium , Normania , Triguera and Lycopersicum have been transferred to Solanum .
The subtribe is therefore composed of two genera :
* Jaltomata , which contains 50 neotropical species .
* Solanum , the largest genus in the family and one of the broadest of the angiosperms , with 1,328 species distributed across the whole world .
INCERTAE
SEDIS Section::::Incertae sedis .
The following genera have not yet been placed in any of the recognized subfamilies within the solanaceas ( incertae sedis ) .
* Duckeodendron , monotypic genus from the Amazon rainforest .
*
Parabouchetia , poorly - known , monotypic genus from Brazil .
* Pauia , monotypic genus from Assam and Arunachal Pradesh in N.E.India GENERA AND DISTRIBUTION OF SPECIES Section::::Genera and distribution of species .
The Solanaceae contain 98 genera and some 2,700 species .
Despite this immense richness of species , they are not uniformly distributed between the genera .
The eight most important genera contain more than 60 % of the species , as shown in the table below .
Solanum – the genus that typifies the family - includes nearly 50 % of the total species of the solanaceas . !
Genera !
Approximate number of species ECONOMIC IMPORTANCE Section::::Economic importance .
The solanaceas include such important food species as the potato ( Solanum tuberosum ) , the tomato ( Solanum lycopersicum ) , the pepper ( Capsicum annuum ) and the aubergine or egg plant ( Solanum melongena ) .
Nicotiana tabacum , originally from South America , is now cultivated throughout the world to produce tobacco .
Many solanaceas are important weeds in various parts of the world .
Their importance lies in the fact that they can host pathogens or diseases of the cultivated plants , therefore their presence increases the loss of yield or the quality of the harvested product .
An example of this can be seen with Acnistus arborescens and Browalia americana that host thrips , which cause damage to associated cultivated plants , and certain species of Datura that play host to various types of virus that are later transmitted to cultivated solanaceas .
Some species of weeds such as , Solanum mauritianum in South Africa represent such serious ecological and economic problems that studies are being carried out with the objective of developing a biological control through the use of insects .
Various solanaceas species are grown as ornamental trees or shrubs .
Examples include Brugmansia
x candida ( " Angel 's Trumpet " ) grown for its large pendulous trumpet - shaped flowers , or Brunfelsia latifolia , whose flowers are very fragrant and change colour from violet to white over a period of 3 days .
Other shrub species that are grown for their attractive flowers are Lycianthes rantonnetii ( Blue Potato Bush or Paraguay Nightshade ) with violet - blue flowers and Nicotiana glauca ( " Tree Tobacco " )
Other solanacea species and genera that are grown as ornamentals are the petunia ( Petunia × hybrida ) , Lycium , Solanum , Cestrum , Calibrachoa × hybrida and Solandra .
There is even a hybrid between Petunia and Calibrachoa ( which constitutes a new nothogenus called × Petchoa G. Boker & J. Shaw ) that is being sold as an ornamental .
Many other species , in particular those that produce alkaloids , are used in pharmacology and medicine ( Nicotiana , Hyoscyamus , and Datura ) .
SOLANACEAS AND THE GENOME Section::::Solanaceas and the genome .
Many of the species belonging to this family , among them tobacco and the tomato , are model organisms that are used for research into fundamental biological questions .
One of the aspects of the solanaceas ' genomics is an international project that is trying to understand how the same collection of genes and proteins can give rise to a group of organisms that are so morphologically and ecologically different .
The first objective of this project was to sequence the genome of the tomato .
In order to achieve this each of the 12 chromosomes of the tomato 's haploid genome was assigned to different sequencing centres in different countries .
So chromosomes 1 and 10 were sequenced in the United States , 3 and 11 in China , 2 in Korea , 4 in Britain , 5 in India , 7 in France , 8 in Japan , 9 in Spain and 12 in Italy .
The sequencing of the mitochondrial genome was carried out in Argentina and the chloroplast genome was sequenced in the European Union .
SEE ALSO
* List of plants poisonous to equines
REFERENCES
* Dimitri , M. 1987 .
Enciclopedia Argentina de Agricultura y Jardinería .
Tomo I. Descripción de plantas cultivadas .
Editorial ACME S.A.C.I. , Buenos Aires .
* Hunziker , Armando T. 2001 .
The Genera of Solanaceae .
A.R.G. Gantner Verlag K.G. , Ruggell , Liechtenstein . .
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Sol Genomics Network * Solanaceae Network - pictures of plants
* Solanaceae Source - A worldwide taxonomic monograph of all species in the genus Solanum .
* Solanaceae of Chile , by Chileflora
* Solanaceae in L. Watson and M.J. Dallwitz ( 1992 onwards ) .
The families of flowering plants : descriptions , illustrations , identification , information retrieval .
http://delta-intkey.com
* Solanaceae in USDA Plants Database .
* Family Solanaceae Flowers in Israel
* SOL Genomics Network , Universidad de Cornell
* Imagines de various species of Solanaceae * Solanaceae de Chile , by Chileflora
* Chilli :
La especia del Nuevo Mundo
( Article in Spanish by Germán Octavio López Riquelme regarding the biology , nutrition , culture and medical aspects of Chile .
* Solanaceae Resources on the Web * Jäpelt RB , Jakobsen J ( 2013 )
Vitamin D in plants : a review of occurrence , analysis , and biosynthesis .
Front Plant Sci 4 , No . 136 -- Note the reference to higher cholesterol levels ( and consequent Vitamin D3 levels ) in family Solanaceae