KIELBASA Kielbasa ( also spelled ) is a type of meat sausage from Poland and a staple of Polish cuisine .
ETYMOLOGY AND USAGE Section::::Etymology and usage .
The word entered English directly from Polish ' ( or ) , meaning " sausage " .
Etymological sources state that originally , the word comes from Turkic kol basa , literally " hand - pressed " , or kül basa , literally " ash - pressed " ( cognate with modern Turkish dish ' ) , or possibly from the Hebrew kol basar ( ) , literally meaning " all kinds of meat ; " however , other origins are also possible .
The terms entered English simultaneously from different sources , which accounts for the different spellings .
Usage varies between cultural groups and countries , but overall there is a distinction between American and Canadian usage .
In New Jersey , Pennsylvania and most areas of Greater New York City , a plural Polish transitional form is used , ( ) .
Canadians also use the word kubasa ( or ) , a corruption of the Ukrainian kovbasa ( ) , and Albertans even abbreviate it as kubie to refer to the sausage eaten on a hot dog bun .
VARIETIES AND REGIONAL VARIATIONS POLAND Section::::Varieties and regional variations .
Section::::Poland .
Sausage is a staple of Polish cuisine and comes in dozens of varieties , smoked or fresh , made with pork , beef , turkey , lamb , chicken or veal with every region having its own speciality .
Of these , the kiełbasa lisiecka , produced in Małopolskie , has , since late 2010 had PGI protection .
There are official Polish government guides and classifications of sausages based on size , meat , ready - to - eat or uncooked varieties .
Originally made at home in rural areas , there are a wide variety of recipes for kielbasa preparation at home and for holidays .
Kielbasa is also one of the most traditional foods served at Polish weddings .
Popular varieties include : * kabanosy , a thin , air - dried sausage flavoured with caraway seed , originally made of pork
* kielbasa odesskie , made with beef .
* kiełbasa wędzona , Polish smoked sausage , used often in soups .
* krakowska , a thick , straight sausage hot - smoked with pepper and garlic
; its name comes from Kraków * wiejska ( ) , farmhouse sausage ; it is a large U - shaped pork and veal sausage with marjoram and garlic ; its name means " rural " or ( an adjectival use of ) " country " , or ( adjectival use of ) " village " .
* weselna , " wedding " sausage , medium thick , u - shaped smoked sausage ; often eaten during parties , but not exclusively * kaszanka or kiszka is a traditional blood sausage or black pudding .
* myśliwska is a smoked , dried pork sausage .
* kiełbasa biała , a white sausage sold uncooked and often used in soups .
The most popular kiełbasa is also called " Kiełbasa Polska " ( " Polish Sausage " ) or " Kiełbasa Starowiejska " ( " Old Countryside Sausage " ) .
This one comes closest to what is generally known in America as " kiełbasa " ( a Polish sausage ) .
Nowadays , many major meat packers across America offer a product called " kiełbasa , " usually somewhat different from the original .
In Poland , kiełbasa is often served garnished with fried onions , and – in the form of cut pieces – smoked kiełbasa can be served cold , hot , boiled , baked or grilled .
It can be cooked in soups such as żurek ( sour rye soup ) , kapuśniak ( cabbage soup ) , or grochówka ( pea soup ) , baked or cooked with sauerkraut , or added to bean dishes , stews ( notably bigos , a Polish national dish ) , and casseroles .
Kiełbasa is also very popular served cold as cold cuts on a platter , usually for an appetizer at traditional Polish parties .
It is also a common snack ( zagrycha ) served with beer or plain vodka .
A less widely encountered but equally popular variety of kiełbasa is the White Fresh ( biała - i.e. " white " ) .
It is mainly used as a soup meat , and is therefore sold uncooked and unsmoked .
When used , it is prepared by boiling , frying or boiling in soup in place of raw meat .
This kiełbasa 's taste is similar to a white Thuringian sausage .
Traditionally served with barszcz biały .
HUNGARY Section::::Hungary .
Kolbász is the Hungarian word for sausage .
Hungarian cuisine produces a vast number of types of sausages .
The most common smoked Hungarian sausages are Gyulai Kolbász , Csabai Kolbász , Csemege Kolbász , Házi Kolbász , Cserkész Kolbász , lightly smoked , like Debreceni Kolbász ( or Debreciner ) and Lecsókolbász , a spicy sausage made specifically for serving as part of the dish Lecsó , a vegetable stew with peppers and tomatoes .
Hungarian boiled sausage types are called " hurka " : either liver sausage , " májas " , or blood sausage , " véres " .
All three types of blood sausages must be ingested within 6 hours of preparation to ensure a healthy pre and post - consumption experience per Hungarian regulations .
It is considered rude not to reach completion of the whole sausage in a timely fashion , though it is not considered a crime .
The main ingredient is liver and rice , or blood and rice .
Salt , pepper , and spices are optionally added .
Butter is not .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the United States , kielbasa which may also be referred to as Polish sausage in some areas , is widely available in grocery stores and speciality import markets .
While the smoked variety is more commonly found , the uncured variety is often available , particularly in areas with large Polish populations .
Several sandwiches featuring the sausage as a main ingredient have become iconic in local cuisines including Chicago 's Maxwell Street Polish , Cleveland 's Polish Boy , and several offerings from Primanti Brothers in Pittsburgh .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
In Canada , varieties typical of Poland , Hungary , Slovakia , Ukraine , and elsewhere are available in supermarkets , and more specific varieties can be found in specialty shops .
This type of sausage is particularly associated with the Prairie Provinces , where the Slavic cultural presence is particularly strong .
The world 's largest display model of a Ukrainian sausage is a roadside attraction in Mundare , Alberta , the home of Stawnichy 's Meat Processing .
UKRAINE Section::::Ukraine .
In Ukraine the word " kielbasa " is pronounced " kovbasa " ( Ковбаса ) with the accent being on the last syllable however is sometimes pronounced with a silent v , " kobasa " .
It is a general term and is used to describe a variety of sausages including " domashnia " ( homemade kovbasa ) , " pechinky " ( liver kovbasa ) and " vudzhena " ( smoked kovbasa ) .
It is predominantly eaten in the Western areas of Ukraine such as Halychnyna ( Galicia ) , Volhynia and Bukovena ( Carpathia ) .
It is served in a variety of ways such as fried with onions atop vareneky , sliced on rye bread , eaten with an egg and mustard sauce and lastly in " Yayechnia z Kovbosoyu
i yarnoyu " a dish meaning fried kovbasa with red capsicum and scrambled eggs .
In Ukraine kovbasa is roasted in an oven on both sides and stored in ceramic pots with lard .
The sausage is often made at home however has become increasingly brought at markets and even supermarkets .
Kovbasa also tends to accompany " pysanka " ( dyed and decorated eggs ) as well as the eastern Slavic bread , paska in Ukrainian baskets at Easter time and is blessed by the priest with holy water before being consumed .
ELSEWHERE
Section::::Elsewhere .
In Russia it is known as колбаса ( ) .
In the Russian language the word kolbasa refers to all sausage - like meat products including salami and bologna .
Similar sausages are found in other Slavic nations as well , notably the Czech Republic ( spelled " klobása " , or regionally " klobás " ) , Slovakia ( spelled " klobása " ) , and Slovenia ( spelled " klobása " ) .
In Croatia , as well as in Bosnia and Herzegovina , Montenegro , and Serbia , this sausage is called " kobasica " or " kobasa " , while in Bulgaria and Macedonia it is called " kolbas " .
In Austria it is called " Klobassa " ( similar to the neighbouring Slavic countries ) .
In South Africa , this type of sausage is known as the " Russian " sausage ; often deep fried , and served with chips , as fast food .
SEE ALSO
* Sausage Race
* Sucuk NOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Polish Kielbasa ( Polish Sausage ) * Czech klobásy recipe ( In Czech )