PRAWN CRACKER Prawn crackers , also known as prawn chips and shrimp puffs are deep fried crackers made from starch and prawn that serve as flavouring .
They are a popular snack in parts of Southeast and East Asia .
Prawn crackers are a common snack food throughout Southeast Asia , but most closely associated with Indonesia and Malaysia .
These are called krupuk udang in Indonesian , prawn crackers in British English and shrimp chips or Prawn crackers in American English .
They are known as kroepoek ( old Indonesian spelling for krupuk , based on Dutch spelling rules ) in Dutch , Krabbenchips ( crab chips ) in German , chips à la crevette in French , nuvole di drago ( dragon clouds ) in Italian , and pan de gambas ( shrimp bread ) in Spanish .
There are also Japanese ( かっぱえびせん ) and ( 새우깡 ) shrimp chips which are a popular snack in both countries .
TYPES INDONESIA Section::::Types .
Section::::Indonesia .
Prawn cracker is called krupuk udang in Indonesian , and is merely one variant of many sorts of krupuk recognised in Indonesian cuisine .
In Indonesia the term krupuk or kerupuk is used as umbrella term to refer to this kind of cracker .
Indonesia has perhaps the largest variety of krupuk .
Krupuk udang ( prawn cracker ) and other types of krupuk are ubiquitous in Indonesia .
Examples of popular krupuk udang brands in Indonesia include Finna and Komodo brand .
To achieve maximum crunchiness , most of this pre - packed raw krupuk udang must be sun - dried first before being deep fried at home .
To cook krupuk , a wok and plenty of very hot cooking oil is needed .
Raw krupuk is quite small , hard , and darker in color than cooked one .
Fishing towns of Sidoarjo in East Java , also Cirebon in West Java , are major producers of krupuk udang .
MALAYSIA Section::::Malaysia .
Prawn crackers are one of the most popular snacks in Malaysia and are particularly served at homes of many during festive celebrations ( such as Chinese New Year and Hari Raya ) .
One of the most popular type of prawn cracker in Malaysia are the Keropok Udang Geragau Melaka .
VIETNAM Section::::Vietnam .
Sa Đéc in southern Vietnam is the home of bánh phồng tôm .
The traditional snack is made of ground shrimp , sometimes mixed with cuttlefish , arrowroot flour , tapioca flour , onion , garlic , sugar , fish sauce , cracked black pepper and salt .
Traditionally the dough is steamed , rolled out , cut into round chips then dried .
Another method is to form rolls , steam and then slice into thin rounds before being dried .
Modern production favours the oval shapes such that the chips form a " scooper " as an accompaniment to salads ( gỏi and nộm ) .
The brand Sa Giang is well known .
A variant is bánh phồng nấm flavoured with nấm hương ( shiitake ) or nấm rơm ( straw mushroom ) .
CHINESE CUISINE
Section::::Chinese cuisine .
In Chinese cuisine , prawn crackers may use food colouring ( including shades of white , pale pink , green and blue ) , and tend to be lighter and non - spicy .
However , in China they are easy to find in supermarkets , yet not popular or common in restaurants or when serving food for friends .
Prawn crackers are considered a snack food , but may accompany takeaway Chinese food in Australia , Belgium , the Netherlands , Spain , the United Kingdom , and Ireland .
Shrimp chips are usually served with roasted chicken dishes in Chinese restaurants overseas ( such as white cut chicken and crispy fried chicken ) .
There is also a vegan version available that does not contain seafood .
THE NETHERLANDS Section::::The Netherlands .
Through their historical colonial ties with Indonesia , the Dutch are familiar with Indonesian foodstuffs including the Indonesian prawn crackers .
Assorted types of krupuk ( Dutch : kroepoek ) , deep fried crackers made from starch and flavourings , such as prawn or crab , are available in many Indische , or Indo , ( Dutch - Indonesian ) shops in the Netherlands , which locally are called toko .
Prawn crackers are also available in many of the major supermarkets .
Kroepoek is a standard part of the repertoire of " Indische " ( a word referring to the former Dutch East Indies , present day Indonesia ; not to be confused with the Dutch word Indiaas , meaning " from India " ) restaurants in the Netherlands .
It is also served in Chinese restaurants in Belgium and in the Netherlands .
AUSTRALIA Section::::Australia .
They are also known as prawn crackers or prawn chips in Australia , where they are popular in many Asian restaurants .
They are usually coloured pink with a salty flavour and are usually treated as a side dish , entrée or snack .
PREPARATION Section::::Preparation .
Prawn crackers are made by mixing prawns , tapioca flour and water .
The mixture is rolled out , steamed , sliced and sun - dried .
In the traditional way , to achieve maximum crispiness , raw crackers are usually sun - dried first before frying , to eliminate the moisture .
Once dry , they are deep - fried in oil ( which must be at high heat before cooking ) .
In only a few seconds they expand from thumb - sized semi - transparent chips to white fluffy crackers , much like popcorn , as water bound to the starch expands as it turns into steam .
If left in the open air for more than a few hours ( depending on humidity ) , they start to soften and become chewy and are therefore ideally consumed within a few hours of being fried .
Storing the crackers in a low humidity environment or an airtight container will preserve the crispness .
Packets of unfried prawn crackers may be purchased in oriental stores , or stores that specialise in Asian cuisine .
In the Netherlands , Belgium , Suriname , France , Australia , South Africa and the United Kingdom they are also widely available in general supermarkets .
Prawn crackers of premium quality are aromatic even without additives such as monosodium glutamate ( MSG ) and artificial prawn flavourings to enhance the smell and taste .
The fried prawn crackers may be stored in airtight container for up to 3 months without preservatives and up to 9 months or so depending on the amount of preservatives added .
Most varieties of prawn crackers can also be prepared in a microwave oven , in which a few discs can be cooked in less than a minute .
This will usually cause them to cook and expand in a way similar to when they are deep fried .
For small quantities , this method is faster and less messy , as the crackers do not become as oily .
However , this may cause the cracker to retain a stronger aroma of raw shrimp and the cracker has to be consumed within hours before it softens and loses its crispness .
SEE ALSO
* Fish cracker
* List of deep fried foods REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS