QUARK ( DAIRY PRODUCT )
Quark or quarg is a type of fresh dairy product made by warming soured milk until the desired amount of curdling is met , and then straining it .
It can be classified as fresh acid - set cheese .
Traditional quark can be made without rennet , but in modern dairies small quantities of rennet are typically added .
It is soft , white and unaged , and usually has no salt added .
It is traditional in the cuisines of German - speaking , Slavic and Scandinavian countries .
Dictionaries sometimes translate it as curd cheese , cottage cheese , farmer cheese or junket .
In Germany , quark and cottage cheese are considered to be different types of fresh cheese , while in Eastern Europe cottage cheese is usually viewed as a type of quark ( e.g. Russian for cottage cheese is " зернёный творог " zernyony tvorog , literally " grainy quark " ) .
Quark is similar to French fromage blanc , Indian paneer , and the queso fresco / queijo fresco made in the Iberian Peninsula and in some Latin American countries .
It is distinct from Italian ricotta because ricotta ( Italian " recooked " ) is made from scalded whey .
Quark is somewhat similar to yogurt cheeses such as the South Asian chak(k)a , the Arabic labneh , and the Central Asian suzma or kashk , but while these products are obtained by straining yogurt ( milk fermented with thermophile bacteria ) , quark is made from soured milk fermented with mesophile bacteria .
NAME Section::::Name .
Quark is possibly described by Tacitus in his book Germania as lac concretum ( " thick milk " ) , eaten by Germanic peoples .
However , this could also have meant soured milk or any other kind of fresh cheese or fermented milk product .
Although quark is sometimes referred to loosely as a type of " cottage cheese " , they can be distinguished from the different production aspects and textural quality , with the cottage cheese grains described as more chewy or meaty .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The word Quark ( Late Middle High German : quarc , twarc , zwarg ;
Lower Saxon : dwarg ) , with usage in German documented since the 14th century , is thought to derive from a West Slavic equivalent , such as Lower Sorbian twarog , Upper Sorbian twaroh , Polish twaróg , Czech and Slovak tvaroh , and is also cognate with Russian tvorog ( ) , Bulgarian tvarog ( ) and Belarusian : tvarog ( тварог ) .
The original Old Slavonic * tvarogъ is supposed to be related to the Church Slavonic творъ , tr .
tvor , meaning " form " .
The meaning can thus be interpreted as " milk that solidified and took a form " .
The word formation is thus similar to that of the Italian formaggio and French fromage .
More cognates and forms
The Slavic words may also be cognate with Greek name for cheese τῡρός ( túrós ) .
A cognate term for quark , túró , is used in Hungarian .
Cognates also occur in Scandinavia ( Danish kvark , Norwegian and Swedish kvarg ) and the Netherlands ( Dutch kwark ) .
The Old English form is .
Other German forms include Quarck , and Quargel ( Quärgel ) .
OTHER NAMES
Section::::Other names .
In several languages quark is also known as " white cheese " ( , southern or , , , , ) , as opposed to any rennet - set " yellow cheese " .
Another French name for it is fromage frais ( fresh cheese ) , where the difference to fromage blanc is defined by French legislation : a product named fromage frais must contain live cultures when sold , whereas with fromage blanc fermentation has been halted .
In Swiss French , it is usually called séré .
In Austria , the name Topfen ( pot cheese ) is common .
In Flanders , it is called plattekaas ( flat cheese ) .
In Finnish , it is known as rahka , while in Estonian as kohupiim ( foamy milk ) , in Lithuanian as varškės sūris ( curd cheese ) , and in Latvian as biezpiens ( thick milk ) .
Its Italian name is giuncata or cagliata ( curd ) .
Among the Albanians quark is known as gjizë .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Quark is a member of the acid - set cheese group , whose coagulation mainly relies on the acidity , produced by lactic acid bacteria feeding on the lactose .
But moderate amounts of rennet have also been in use , both at the home consumption level and the industrial level .
Manufacture of quark normally uses pasteurized skim milk as main ingredient , but cream can be added later to adjust fat content .
The lactic acid bacteria are introduced in the form of mesophilic Lactococcus starter cultures .
In the dairy industry today , quark is mostly produced with a small quantity of rennet , added after the culture when the solution is still only slightly acidic ( ph 6.1 ) .
Acidification allowed to continues until the pH reaches around 4.6 , at which acidity level the casein proteins in the milk begins to precipitate .
In Germany , the curd is continuously stirred to prevent it from getting hard , resulting in a thick , creamy texture .
According to German regulations on cheese ( Käseverordnung ) , " fresh cheeses " ( Frischkäse ) such as quark or cottage cheese must contain at least 73 % water in the fat - free component .
German quark is usually sold in plastic tubs with most or all of the whey .
This type of quark has the firmness of sour cream but is slightly drier , resulting in a somewhat crumbly texture ( like ricotta ) .
The basic quark this basic quark or skimmed quark ( Magerquark )
must under German Law have less than 10 % fat by dry mass .
Quark with higher fat content is made by adding cream after cooling .
It has a very smooth and creamy texture and is slightly sweet ( unlike sour cream ) .
A firmer version called Schichtkäse ( layer cheese ) is often used for baking .
Schichtkäse is distinguished from quark by having an added layer of cream sandwiched between two layers of quark .
Quark is also often sold flavored with herbs , spices , or fruit .
In general , dry mass of quark In the 19th century , there was no industrial production of quark ( as end - product ) and it was produced entirely for home use .
In the traditional home - made process , the milk would be allowed to let stand until it soured naturally by the presence of naturally occurring bacteria , although the hardening could be encouraged with the addition of some rennet .
Some or most of the whey is removed to standardize the quark to the desired thickness .
Traditionally , this is done by hanging the cheese in a muslin bag or a loosely woven cotton gauze called cheesecloth and letting the whey drip off , which gives quark its distinctive shape of a wedge with rounded edges .
In industrial production , however , cheese is separated from whey in a centrifuge and later formed into blocks .
Most of the Austrian and other Central and Eastern European varieties contain less whey and are therefore drier and more solid than the German and Scandinavian ones .
RUSSIAN - STYLE Section::::Russian - style .
Under Russian governmental regulations , tvorog is distinguished from cheeses , and classified as a separate type of dairy product .
Typical tvorog usually contain 65 - 80 % water out of the total mass .
The Israeli gevina levana is a creamy variety similar to the German types of quark .
The Russian - style quark was introduced to Israel during the Aliyah of the 1990s by immigrants from the former Soviet Union , and is now available under the name tvorog .
COMMON USES
Section::::Common uses .
Various cuisines feature quark as an ingredient for appetizers , salads , main dishes , side dishes and desserts .
In Germany , quark is sold in cubic plastic tubs and usually comes in three different varieties , Magerquark ( skimmed quark , < 10 % fat by dry mass . ) , " regular " quark ( 20 % fat in dry mass ) and Sahnequark ( " creamy quark " , 40 % fat in dry mass ) with added cream .
Similar gradations in fat content are also common in Eastern Europe .
While Magerquark is often used for baking or is eaten as breakfast with a side of fruit or muesli , Sahnequark also forms the basis of a large number of quark desserts ( called when homemade or when sold in German . ) .
Much like yoghurts in some parts of the world , these foods mostly come with fruit flavoring ( Früchtequark , fruit quark ) , sometimes with vanilla and are often also simply referred to as quark .
DISHES IN GERMAN - SPEAKING AREAS Section::::Dishes in German - speaking areas .
One common use for the quark is in making cheesecake called Käsekuchen or Quarkkuchen in Germany .
Quark cheesecake is called Topfenkuchen in Austria .
The Quarktorte in Switzerland may be equivalent , though this has also been described as a torte that combines quark and cream .
There is also the kwarktaart in neighboring Netherlands .
In these cakes , the quark is typically mixed with eggs , milk or cream , and sugar , and baked or fried .
In Austria , Topfen is commonly used in baking in popular desserts like Topfenkuchen as already mentioned , Topfenstrudel and Topfen - Palatschinken ( a form of crepes ) .
Quark is also often used as an ingredient for sandwiches , salads , and savory dishes .
Quark , vegetable oil and wheat flour are the ingredients of a popular kind of dough , called Quarkölteig , used in German cuisine as an alternative to yeast - leavened dough in home baking , since it is considerably easier to handle and requires no rising period .
The resulting baked goods look and taste very similar to yeast - leavened goods , although they do not last as long and are thus usually consumed immediately after baking .
In Germany , quark mixed with chopped onions and herbs like parsley and chives is called .
Kräuterquark is commonly eaten with boiled potatoes and has some similarity to tzatziki which is based on yoghurt .
Quark with linseed oil and potatoes is the national dish of the Sorbs in Lusatia .
Quark also has been used among Ashkenazi Jews .
SLAVIC COUNTRIES Section::::Slavic countries .
Desserts using quarks ( Russian : tvarog , etc . )
in Slavic regions include the tvarohovník in Slovakia , tvarožník in Czech Republic , sernik in Poland , and syrnyk in Ukraine ) and cheese pancakes ( syrnyky in Russia and Ukraine ) .
In Poland , twaróg is mixed with mashed potatoes to produce a filling for pierogi .
Twaróg is also used to make gnocchi - shaped dumplings called leniwe pierogi ( " lazy pierogi " ) .
Ukrainian recipes for varenyky or lazy varenyky are similar but tvorog and mashed potatoes are different fillings which are usually not mixed together .
In Russia , Ukraine , and Belarus , tvorog
( Russian : творог ) is highly popular and is bought frequently by almost every family .
As a result , tvorog is a member of the official minimal basket of foods in Russia .
In Russian families , it is especially recommended for growing babies .
It can be enjoyed simply with sour cream , or jam , sugar , sugar condensed milk , or as a breakfast food .
It is often used as a stuffing in blinchiki offered at many fast - food restaurants .
It is also commonly used as the base for making Easter cakes .
It is mixed with eggs , sugar , raisins and nuts and dried into a solid pyramid - shaped mass called paskha .
The mass can also be fried , then known as syrniki .
In Latvia , quark is eaten savory mixed with sour cream and scallions on rye bread or with potatoes .
In desserts , quark is commonly baked into biezpiena plātsmaize , a crusted sheet cake baked with or without raisins .
A sweetened treat biezpiena sieriņš ( small curd cheese ) is made of small sweetened blocks of quark dipped in chocolate .
Estonian Quark is evaluated on olfaction , vision , taste , after taste , and texture and is distributed nationally as well as to nearby regions .
AVAILABILITY IN OTHER COUNTRIES Section::::Availability in other countries .
Although common in continental Europe , manufacturing of quark is rare in the Americas .
A few dairies manufacture it , such as the Vermont Creamery in Vermont , and some specialty retailers carry it .
Lifeway Foods manufactures a product under the title " farmer cheese " which is available in a variety of metropolitan locations with former Russian populations .
Elli Quark , a Californian manufacturer of quark , offers soft quark in different flavors .
In Canada , the firmer East European variety of quark is manufactured by Liberté Natural Foods ; a softer German - style quark is manufactured in the Didsbury , Alberta , plant of Calgary - based Foothills Creamery .
Glengarry
Fine Cheesemaking in Lancaster ( Eastern Ontario ) also produces Quark .
Also available in Canada is the very similar Dry Curd Cottage Cheese manufactured by Dairyland .
Quark may also be available as " baking cheese " , " pressed cottage cheese " , or " fromage frais " .
In Australia , Ukrainian traditional quark is produced by Blue Bay Cheese in Mornington Peninsula .
It is also sometimes available from supermarkets labelled as quark or quarg .
In New Zealand , European traditional Kwark is produced by Karikaas in North Canterbury .
It is available in 350 g pots and available online and in speciality stores such as Moore Wilsons .
In the United Kingdom , fat - free quark is produced by several independent manufacturers based throughout the country .
All the big four supermarkets in the UK sell their own branded quark , as well as other brands of quark .
SEE ALSO * Clabber ( food )
* Mizithra * List of ancient dishes and foods * List of German cheeses * List of cheeses EXPLANATORY NOTES REFERENCES Citations Bibliography
* .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Instruction on how to make Quark at home
* Recipe for homemade Quark without rennet
* Easter Molded Cheese
Dessert Recipe - Paska / Paskha
* Konditoreja un deserti - recepšu kolekcijas , Receptes.lv
* Making Quark at home using buttermilk