ANT - MAN AND THE WASP Ant - Man and the Wasp is a 2018 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics characters Scott Lang / Ant - Man and Hope van Dyne
/ Wasp .
Produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures , it is the sequel to 2015 's Ant - Man , and the twentieth film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe ( MCU ) .
The film is directed by Peyton Reed and written by the writing teams of Chris McKenna and Erik Sommers , and Paul Rudd , Andrew Barrer , and Gabriel Ferrari .
It stars Rudd as Lang and Evangeline Lilly as Van Dyne , alongside Michael Peña , Walton Goggins , Bobby Cannavale , Judy Greer , Tip " T.I. " Harris , David Dastmalchian , Hannah John - Kamen , Abby Ryder Fortson , Randall Park , Michelle Pfeiffer , Laurence Fishburne , and Michael Douglas .
In Ant - Man and the Wasp , the titular pair work with Hank Pym to retrieve Janet van Dyne from the quantum realm .
Talks for a sequel to Ant - Man began shortly after that film was released .
Ant - Man and the Wasp was officially announced in October 2015 , with Rudd and Lilly returning to reprise their roles .
A month later , Ant - Man director Reed was officially set to return ; he was excited to develop the film from the beginning after joining the first film later in the process , and also to introduce Hope van Dyne as the Wasp in this film , insisting that she and Lang are equals .
Filming took place from August to November 2017 , at Pinewood Atlanta Studios in Fayette County , Georgia , as well as Metro Atlanta , San Francisco , Savannah , Georgia , and Hawaii .
Ant - Man and the Wasp had its world premiere in Hollywood on June 25 , 2018 , and was released on July 6 , 2018 , in the United States in IMAX and
3D. The film received praise for its levity , humor , and performances , particularly those of Rudd and Lilly , and grossed over $ 622 million worldwide , making it the ninth - highest - grossing film of 2018 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Two years after Scott Lang was placed on house arrest due to his involvement with the Avengers in violation of the Sokovia Accords , Hank Pym and his daughter Hope van Dyne briefly manage to open a tunnel to the quantum realm .
They believe Pym 's wife Janet van Dyne might be trapped there after shrinking to sub - atomic levels in 1987 .
When he had previously visited the quantum realm , Lang had unknowingly become quantumly entangled with Janet , and now he receives an apparent message from her .
With only days left of house arrest , Lang contacts Pym about Janet despite the strained relationship they have due to Lang 's actions with the Avengers .
Hope and Pym kidnap Lang , leaving a decoy so as not to arouse suspicion from FBI agent Jimmy Woo .
Believing the message from Janet to be confirmation that she is alive , the trio work to build a stable tunnel so they can take a vehicle to the quantum realm and retrieve her .
They arrange to buy a part needed for the tunnel from black market dealer Sonny Burch , who has realized the potential profit that can be earned from Pym 's research and double - crosses them .
Donning the Wasp outfit , Hope fights off Burch and his men until she is attacked by a quantumly unstable masked woman .
Lang tries to help fight off this " ghost " , but the woman escapes with Pym 's lab , which has been shrunk down to the size of a suitcase .
Pym reluctantly visits his estranged former partner Bill Foster with Hope and Lang .
Foster helps them locate the lab , where the ghost captures the trio and reveals herself to be Ava Starr .
Her father Elihas , another of Pym 's former partners , died along with his wife during the experiment that caused Ava 's unstable state .
Foster reveals that he has been helping Ava , whom they plan to cure using Janet 's quantum energy .
Believing that this will kill Janet , Pym refuses to help them and escapes with Hope , Lang , and the lab .
Opening a stable version of the tunnel , Pym , Hope , and Lang are able to contact Janet , who gives them a precise location to find her but warns that they only have two hours before the unstable nature of the realm separates them for a century .
Burch learns the trio 's location from Lang 's business partners Luis , Dave , and Kurt , and informs a contact at the FBI .
Luis warns Lang , who rushes home before Woo can see him violating his house arrest .
Pym and Hope are arrested by the FBI , allowing Ava to take the lab .
Lang is soon able to help Pym and Hope escape custody , and they find the lab .
Lang and Hope distract Ava while Pym enters the quantum realm to retrieve Janet , but Burch and his men also attack Lang and Hope which allows Ava to begin forcibly taking Janet 's energy .
Luis , Dave , and Kurt help incapacitate Burch and his men so that Lang and Hope can stop Ava .
Pym and Janet return safely from the quantum realm , and Janet voluntarily gifts some of her energy to Ava to temporarily stabilize her .
Lang returns home once again , in time for a now suspicious Woo to release him at the end of his house arrest .
Ava and Foster go into hiding .
In a mid - credits scene , Pym , Lang , Hope , and Janet plan to harvest quantum energy to help Ava remain stable .
While Lang is in the quantum realm doing this , the other three disintegrate .
CAST
* Paul Rudd as Scott Lang / Ant - Man : * Evangeline Lilly as Hope van Dyne
/ Wasp : * Michael Peña as Luis : * Walton Goggins as Sonny Burch : A " low - level criminal - type " who seeks to obtain Pym 's technology for sale on the black market .
* Bobby Cannavale as Jim Paxton : A police officer and husband to Lang 's ex - wife Maggie .
* Judy Greer as Maggie :
Lang 's ex - wife .
* Tip " T.I. " Harris as Dave : A member of Lang 's X - Con Security crew .
* David Dastmalchian as Kurt : A member of Lang 's X - Con Security crew .
*
Hannah John - Kamen as Ava Starr / Ghost :
* Abby Ryder Fortson as Cassie : The daughter of Lang and Maggie .
* Randall Park as Jimmy Woo : An FBI agent and Lang 's parole officer .
* Michelle Pfeiffer as Janet van Dyne :
* Laurence Fishburne as Bill Foster :
* Michael Douglas as Hank Pym : Section::::Cast .
Additionally Stan Lee , co - creator of the titular heroes , has a cameo in the film as a man whose car gets shrunk by accident .
Michael Cerveris appears as Ava 's father Elihas Starr while Riann Steele plays his wife Catherine .
Tim Heidecker and Brian Huskey appear in cameos as a whale boat captain named Daniel Gooobler and a teacher at Cassie 's school , respectively .
Sonny Burch 's team of men includes Divian Ladwa as Uzman , Goran Kostić as Anitolov , and Rob Archer as Knox , while Sean Kleier portrays Stoltz , Burch 's FBI inside man and Jimmy Woo 's subordinate .
Tom Scharpling and Jon Wurster of The Best Show make brief appearances as Burch 's SUV drivers .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
In June 2015 , Ant - Man director Peyton Reed expressed interest in returning for a sequel or prequel to that film , saying that he had " really fallen in love with these characters " and felt " there 's a lot of story to tell with Hank Pym " .
A month later , Pym actor Michael Douglas said he was not signed for any additional films , but " would look forward to more if it comes my way " , and expressed the desire to have his wife Catherine Zeta - Jones cast as Janet van Dyne for a potential follow - up .
Evangeline Lilly — who played the daughter of Pym and Van Dyne , Hope van Dyne — wanted to see Michelle Pfeiffer in the role .
Producer Kevin Feige revealed that the studio had a " supercool idea " for the next Ant - Man film , and " if audiences want it , we 'll find a place to do it . "
Reed also mentioned that there had been talks of making a standalone adventure with Hank Pym as Ant - Man , possibly including the original opening to Ant - Man featuring Jordi Mollà which was cut from the final film .
Eric Eisenberg of Cinema Blend opined that a standalone adventure with Pym and the cut sequence would be a good candidate to revive the Marvel One - Shots short film series .
By the end of July , David Dastmalchian expressed interest in returning for a sequel as Kurt .
In October 2015 , Marvel Studios confirmed the sequel , titled Ant - Man and the Wasp , with a scheduled release date of July 6 , 2018 .
Reed was in negotiations to direct the sequel by the end of the month , and announced his return in November , along with the confirmation of Paul Rudd and Lilly returning as Scott Lang / Ant - Man and Hope van Dyne
/ Wasp , respectively .
Despite being offered to direct sequels in the past , Reed had never done so out of a lack of interest , but was excited to work on Ant - Man and the Wasp because there was " a lot more story to tell with these characters that I have a genuine affection and kind of protective feeling about " .
He was also able to build the sequel " from the ground up " , as he joined the first film late in the process following the departure of original writer and director Edgar Wright , and wanted to explore elements that he had set up in the first film .
He first began work on an outline for the sequel , which he thought could be " weird , unique and different " now that the characters ' origins had been established .
On being the first MCU film to have a female character in the title with the Wasp , Reed called it " organic " and noted the Wasp 's final line in Ant - Man—'It 's about damn time'—as " very much about her specific character and arc in that movie , but it is absolutely about a larger thing .
It 's about damn time : We 're going to have a fully realized , very complicated hero in the next movie who happens to be a woman . "
Reed would push to ensure the Wasp received equal publicity and merchandise for the film , and wanted to explore the backstory of Janet van Dyne as well .
He had " definite ideas " of who should portray that character .
Reed said the alternate title Wasp and the Ant - Man was briefly considered , but was not chosen due to fan expectation given the comics history of the phrase " Ant - Man and the Wasp " .
That month , Adam McKay , one of the writers of Ant - Man , expressed interest in returning to write the film , and Douglas confirmed that he was in talks to return as well .
Reed stated in early December that the film may " call back " to the heist film genre and tone of Ant - Man , but that Ant - Man and the Wasp would " have an entirely different genre template " .
He hoped to incorporate additional flashback sequences in the film , as well as explore Pym 's various identities from the comics and his psychology .
Reed also said he was " excited " about exploring and discovering the film version of the Ant - Man and Wasp relationship that is " a romantic partnership and a heroic partnership " in the comics , a " different dynamic than we 've seen in the rest of the [ MCU ] , an actual partnership . "
Additionally , Reed mentioned that pre - production would " probably " start in October 2016 , with filming scheduled for early 2017 .
Production writers for the first film , Gabriel Ferrari and Andrew Barrer , signed on to write the script along with Rudd , with writing starting " in earnest " in January 2016 .
The next month , McKay stated that he would be involved with the film in some capacity .
By April , the four writers and Reed had been " holed up in a room ...
brainstorming the story " , with Reed promising that it would have " stuff in it that you 've never ever seen in a movie before " .
Feige added that they wanted to " stay true to what made [ Ant - Man ] so unique and different " , and teased the potential of seeing the Giant - Man version of Lang that had been introduced in ( 2016 ) .
Despite being " intimately involved in the writing and the development of the script " , Reed did not take or receive a writing credit on the film .
In June 2016 , Reed said that for inspiration from the comics he had been looking at " early Avengers stuff and all the way up to the Nick Spencer stuff now " , and was focusing on iconic images that could be replicated in the film over story beats from the comics .
He added that there was " definitely a chance " for Michael Peña , Tip " T.I. " Harris , and Dastmalchian to reprise their respective roles as Luis , Dave , and Kurt from the first film .
At San Diego Comic - Con 2016 , Feige stated that Reed and Rudd were still working on the script , and that filming was now expected to begin in June 2017 .
Rudd elaborated that they had " turned in a treatment , but it 's so preliminary .
We 'll see .
We have an idea of what it might look like , but it could change a lot from where we 're at now . "
The next month , Peña was confirmed to be returning as Luis , while filming was revealed to be taking place in Atlanta , Georgia .
In early October , an initial script had been completed for the film that was awaiting approval from Marvel .
Reed later revealed that early drafts of the script included a cameo appearance from Captain America , appearing during Luis ' flashback sequences as he was recapping Lang 's involvement in the airport battle in Captain America : Civil War .
However , the writers chose to remove the appearance in the final script since the events of Civil War were already referenced frequently in the film , and this instance " did n't feel organic to the story . "
PRE - PRODUCTION Section::::Pre - production .
At the start of November 2016 , Reed said that the film 's production would transition from " the writing phase " to " official prep " that month , beginning with visual development .
Reed reiterated his excitement for introducing the Wasp and " really designing her look , the way she moves , the power set , and figuring out , sort of , who Hope van Dyne is as a hero " .
Reed was inspired by the films After Hours ( 1985 ) , Midnight Run ( 1988 ) , and What 's Up
, Doc ?
( 1972 ) for the look and feel of Ant - Man and the Wasp .
While the first film was more of a heist film , Reed described this as part action film , part romantic comedy , and was inspired by the works of Elmore Leonard where there are " villains , but we also have antagonists , and we have these roadblocks to our heroes getting to where they need to be " .
He also stated his disappointment in the Giant - Man introduction happening in Civil War , rather than an Ant - Man film , but noted that the appearance provided character development opportunities between Lang , Pym , and Van Dyne since Pym is " very clear in the first movie about how he feels about Stark and how he feels about The Avengers and being very protective of this technology that he has " , and so Reed thought Pym would be " pissed " and Van Dyne would feel betrayed , which was Reed 's " in " for those characters ' starting dynamics .
Reed added that he spends " a lot of time " talking with the other writers and directors of MCU films , and that he and the writers on this film wished to maintain " our little Ant - Man corner of the universe .
Because it 's a whole different vibe tonally " .
Quantum physicist Spyridon Michalakis from the Institute for Quantum Information and Matter at the California Institute of Technology returned to consult on the film , after doing the same on Ant - Man , and explained the science behind getting extremely small to the filmmakers .
Michalakis described the subatomic realm as " a place of infinite possibility , an alternative universe where the laws of physics and forces of nature as we know them have n't crystallized " and suggested it should be represented in the film by " beautiful colors changing constantly to reflect transience . "
In February 2017 , Douglas confirmed that he would reprise his role as Hank Pym in the film .
During the Hollywood premiere of Guardians of the Galaxy Vol .
2 in April , Dastmalchian confirmed his return as Kurt , and a month later , Harris confirmed his return as Dave as well .
Through that May , Marvel was meeting with several actresses for a " key role " in the sequel , with Hannah John - Kamen cast in the part at the beginning of June .
The following month , Randall Park joined the cast as Jimmy Woo , and Walton Goggins was cast in an undisclosed role .
At San Diego Comic - Con 2017 , Park 's casting was confirmed ; John - Kamen and Goggins ' roles were revealed to be Ghost and Sonny Burch , respectively ; and the casting of Pfeiffer as Janet van Dyne and Laurence Fishburne as Bill Foster was announced .
Judy Greer was confirmed to be reprising her role as Maggie from the previous film the following week .
Louise Frogley served as costume designer on the film after doing so for Marvel 's ( 2017 ) , and worked with Ivo Coveney to create the superhero suits for the film .
Based on designs by Andy Park , the suits are updated for the film from the 1960s - inspired designs used in the first Ant - Man to more modern designs .
The Wasp suit included practical wings which were replaced with digital wings for when they are expanded and ready for flight .
The Russo brothers , directors of and , which were filming while Ant - Man and the Wasp was preparing to film , were in constant discussion with Reed in order to ensure story elements would line up between the films .
Joe Russo added that Ant - Man and the Wasp would have " some [ plot ] elements that stitch in " closely with Avengers : Infinity War , more so than some of the other films leading up to the Avengers films .
Reed knew Ant - Man and the Wasp would be " a fairly stand - alone movie but ... could not ignore the events of Infinity War " , with the biggest connection occurring in the film 's mid - credit scene .
Since the events of Ant - Man and the Wasp occur over 48 hours , the timeline in relation to Infinity War was " left purposefully ambiguous " with Reed noting there had been discussions of placing " little Easter eggs along the way , to start to reveal to the audience where the movie takes place in the timeline , [ but t]hat felt not very fun to us and kind of obvious . "
Reed also liked how the film ends with closure and on a positive note " and then to BANG — give the audience a gut punch right after the main credits " , with the sequence showing Hank Pym , Janet van Dyne , and Hope van Dyne fading away due to the events of Avengers :
Infinity War .
The film also has a post - credit scene that shows the ant who doubled for Lang while under house arrest performing a drum solo .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography began on August 1 , 2017 , at Pinewood Atlanta Studios in Fayette County , Georgia , under the working title Cherry Blue ; Dante Spinotti served as director of photography , shooting on Arri Alexa 65 cameras , with some sequences being shot with a Frazier lens .
At the start of filming , Marvel revealed that Bobby Cannavale and Abby Ryder Fortson would also reprise their roles from the first film , respectively as Paxton and Cassie , and that Chris McKenna and Erik Sommers had contributed to the screenplay .
The film 's lab and quantum tunnel set was inspired by The Time Tunnel ( 1966–67 ) , and was the largest physical set built for an MCU film , which Reed jokingly said was " a little counter - intuitive " .
For the sequence where Janet van Dyne communicates through Lang , inspiration was taken from All of Me ( 1984 ) in which Lily Tomlin 's character is trapped in the body of Steve Martin 's character .
There were discussions about having Pfeiffer perform the scene first to give Rudd an idea of how she would act , but the group ultimately decided to let Rudd invent the scene completely himself .
For the chamber in Ghost 's lair , the production team under production designer Shepherd Frankel wanted to create an environment that was unique to the MCU , and designed the chamber with fresnel lenses to give it concentric - circle patterns that served a practical purpose for the film 's story as well as differentiating the aesthetics of it from other sets and creating mystery about the character .
The chamber is surrounded by " support shapes " to " create this feeling of desperation and yearning for family and stability " .
Filming also took place in Metro Atlanta , with filming locations including the Atlanta International School , the Midtown and Buckhead districts of Atlanta , and the Samuel M. Inman Middle School in the city 's Virginia - Highland neighborhood ; as well as Emory University and the Atlanta Motor Speedway in Hampton , Georgia .
Additional filming took place in San Francisco in September 2017 , in Savannah , Georgia in late October , and in Hawaii .
Production wrapped on November 19 , 2017 .
POST - PRODUCTION Section::::Post - production .
In late November , Lilly said that the characters would try to enter the quantum realm in the film , and their potential success would " open a whole entire new multi - verse to enter into and play around in " for the MCU .
The film includes a clip from Animal House ( 1978 ) , which Reed was reminded of while discussing the quantum realm science for the film .
Reed insisted that the film be shorter than two hours since it would be following the " massive epic " Infinity War and because it is " an action / comedy , and it did n't want to overstay its welcome " .
The film 's main credits sequence is a " table - top " version of its action sequences , and was created by Elastic .
An alternative idea that had been considered was to create a " fake behind - the - scenes documentary " that would have made the film look like it was a 1950s Godzilla movie with " people in suits stomping on model cityscapes " .
VISUAL EFFECTS Section::::Visual effects .
Visual effects for the film were created by DNEG , Scanline VFX , Method Studios , Luma Pictures , Lola VFX , Industrial Light & Magic , Cinesite , Rise FX , Rodeo FX , Crafty Apes , Perception NYC , Digital Domain , and The Third Floor .
DNEG worked on over 500 shots , including the effects for Ghost — which were shared with the other vendors — the third act chase sequence , and the final Ghost fight as Hank and Janet are returning from the quantum realm .
For the " macro - photography " sequences in the film , DNEG took a different approach from their work in Ant - Man due to issues including trying to get a camera to seem small enough to capture the small actions .
Though some of the film was shot with a Frazier lens that provides extra depth of field , DNEG would still need to " re - project the road higher and " raise the floor level " to simulate a tiny sized camera " .
As the third act chase sequence was mainly shot in Atlanta , while being set in San Francisco , DNEG VFX Supervisor Alessandro Ongaro noted it required " extensive environment work " with background elements in some shots not being salvageable at all .
DNEG ultimately created 130 unique environments for the chase .
Clear Angle aided DNEG with the Lidar surveying and photography of San Francisco , and were able to get their information for Lombard Street down to the millimeter resolution .
Lola once again worked on the de - aging sequences with Douglas , Pfeiffer , and Fishburne .
The flashback sequences featuring a younger Hank Pym were set around the same time as the flashback sequences of Ant - Man , so Lola were able to use a similar process , referencing Douglas ' appearance in Wall Street ( 1987 ) and having the actor on set in a different wardrobe and wig .
Lola VFX Supervisor Trent Claus felt Pfeiffer 's was less complicated , since " she has aged incredibly well " and still has big hair and a big smile .
Pfeiffer 's work from Ladyhawke ( 1985 ) and other films around that time was referenced .
For Fishburne , his son served as his younger double , and helped inform Lola how the older Fishburne 's skin would have looked in certain lighting situations .
The films Lola looked to for Fishburne 's younger self included Boyz n
the Hood ( 1991 ) and Deep Cover ( 1992 ) .
Lola also made Fishburne thinner , and all actors had their posture adjusted .
Luma worked on the scenes where Ant - Man and the Wasp infiltrate Ghost 's hideout , where they had to recreate the entire environment with CGI .
They also created the first quantum tunnel sequence where Ghost receives her powers , and the flashback missile launch , which had to be replicated exactly from how it appeared in Ant - Man .
The new version of the quantum realm , designed by Reed and production VFX supervisor Stephane Ceretti , was created by Method .
Method Studios VFX Supervisor Andrew Hellen , explained , " We did a lot of research into macro and cellular level photography , and played with different ways to visualize quantum mechanics .
It has a very magical quality , with a scientific edge .
We also used glitching effects and macro lensing to ground the footage , and keep it from feeling too terrestrial . "
Method also worked on the sequence when Lang is the size of a preschooler , and created the digital doubles for Ant - Man and Wasp ; Method used the same level of detail on the digital double suits regardless of what scale they were .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
In June 2017 , Reed confirmed that Christophe Beck , who composed the score for Ant - Man , would return for Ant - Man and the Wasp .
Beck reprised his main theme from Ant - Man , and also wrote a new one for Wasp that he wanted to be " high energy " and show that she is more certain of her abilities than Lang .
When choosing between these themes for specific scenes throughout the film , Beck tried to choose the Wasp theme more often so there would be " enough newness in the score to feel like it 's going new places , and is n't just some retread . "
Hollywood Records and Marvel Music released the soundtrack album digitally on July 6 , 2018 .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
Concept art and " pre - CGI video " for the film was shown at the 2017 San Diego Comic - Con .
In January 2018 , Hyundai Motor America announced that the 2019 Hyundai Veloster would play a significant role in the film , with other Hyundai vehicles also appearing .
The first trailer for the film was released on January 30 , 2018 on Good Morning America , and used the guitar riff from Adam and the Ants ' " Ants Invasion " .
David Betancourt of The Washington Post called the release , the day after the widely praised Black Panther premiere , a " smart move " ; with Black Panther and Avengers : Infinity War also releasing in 2018 , " it can be easy [ to ] forget that hey , there an Ant - Man sequel coming this year ...
So Marvel Studios giving us a quick reminder with this trailer release is logical " .
Tracy Brown , writing for the Los Angeles Times , praised how the trailer prominently featured Lilly 's Van Dyne " [ showing ] off how she was always meant to be a superhero " .
A second trailer was released on May 1 , 2018 , following a teaser video featuring the Infinity War cast asking " where were Ant - Man and The Wasp ? "
in that film .
Graeme McMillan of The Hollywood Reporter felt the trailer made the film feel " very much like an intentional antidote for , or at least alternative to , the grimness of Infinity Wars downbeat ending " , calling it " a smart move " since it could be considered " a palate cleanser and proof that Marvel has more to offer ... before audiences dive back into the core narrative with next year 's Captain Marvel . "
In June 2018 , Feige presented several scenes from the film at CineEurope .
Promotional partners for the film included Dell , Synchrony Financial , and Sprint .
In total , Disney spent about $ 154 million worldwide on promoting the film .
RELEASE
THEATRICAL Section::::Release .
Section::::Theatrical .
Ant - Man and the Wasp had its world premiere at the El Capitan Theatre in Hollywood on June 25 , 2018 , and was released in the United States on July 6 , 2018 , where it opened in 4,206 theaters , of which 3,000 were in 3D , 403 were in IMAX , over 660 were in premium large format , and over 220 were in D - Box and 4D.
The film was scheduled to be released in the United Kingdom on June 29 , 2018 , but was rescheduled in November 2017 to August 3 , 2018 , in order to avoid competition with the 2018 FIFA World Cup .
Charles Gant of The Guardian and Screen International noted , " The worry for film distributors is that audiences will be caught up in the tournament .
So it 's easier to play safe and not date your film at this time , especially during the group stage , when all the qualifying nations are competing . "
Tom Butler of Yahoo !
Movies UK added that , unlike the first film , which was one of the lowest - grossing MCU films in the UK , anticipation levels for the film " are at an all - time high following the events of Infinity War " and " UK audiences will probably have found out what happens in the film well before it opens in UK cinemas , and this could have a negative impact on its box office potential . "
Butler and Huw Fullerton of Radio Times both opined the delay could also be in part because of Disney also delaying the United Kingdom release of Incredibles 2 to July 13 , 2018 ( a month after its United States release ) , and not wanting to compete with itself with the two films .
This in turn led fans in the country to start a Change.org petition to have Disney move the release date up several weeks , similarly to how Avengers : Infinity Wars United States release was moved up a week the previous May. HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Ant - Man and the Wasp was released on digital download by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on October 2 , 2018 , and on Ultra HD Blu - ray , Blu - ray , and DVD on October 16 .
The digital and Blu - ray releases include behind - the - scenes featurettes , an introduction from Reed , deleted scenes , and gag reels .
The digital release also features a look at the role concept art plays in bringing the various MCU films to life and a faux commercial for Online Close - Up Magic University .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Ant - Man and the Wasp grossed $ 216.6 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 406 million in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 622.7 million .
Following its opening , Deadline Hollywood estimated the film would turn a net profit of around $ 100 million .
It is the ninth - highest - grossing film of 2018 .
Ant - Man and the Wasp earned $ 33.8 million on its opening day in the United States and Canada ( including $ 11.5 million from Thursday night previews ) , for an opening weekend total of $ 75.8 million ; this was a 33 % improvement over the first film 's debut of $ 57.2 million .
Its opening included $ 6 million from IMAX screens .
In its second weekend , the film earned $ 28.8 million , coming in second behind , and in its third weekend grossed $ 16.1 million , coming in fourth .
The film placed sixth in its fourth weekend , seventh in its fifth weekend , and tenth in its sixth weekend .
BoxOffice Magazine projected a final domestic gross of $ 225 million .
Outside the United States and Canada , the film earned $ 85 million from 41 markets , where it opened number one in all except New Zealand .
Its South Korea opening was $ 20.9 million ( which included previews ) .
The $ 15.5 million opening from the market without previews was the second - best opening of 2018 behind Avengers : Infinity War .
In its second weekend , playing in 44 markets , it remained number one in Australia , Hong Kong , South Korea , and Singapore .
The film opened in France in its third weekend , earning $ 4.1 million , and opened in Germany in its fourth , where it was number one and earned $ 2.8 million , including previews .
The next weekend saw Ant - Man and the Wasp open at number one ( when including previews ) in the United Kingdom , where it earned $ 6.5 million , and
two weeks later , Italy opened number one with $ 2.7 million ( including previews ) .
In its eighth weekend , the film 's $ 68 million opening in China was the fourth - best MCU opening in China and the third - highest Hollywood film opening of 2018 .
$ 7.2 million was from IMAX , which was the best August IMAX opening in China .
The film opened in Japan the next weekend , earning $ 3.7 million , which was the top Western film for the weekend .
, the film 's largest markets were China ( $ 117.5 million ) , South Korea ( $ 42.4 million ) , and the United Kingdom ( $ 21.5 million ) .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
The review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes reported an approval rating of 88 % based on 355 reviews , and an average rating of 7/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , "
A lighter , brighter superhero movie powered by the effortless charisma of Paul Rudd and Evangeline Lilly , Ant - Man and The Wasp offers a much - needed MCU palate cleanser .
"
Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned the film a normalized score of 70 out of 100 , based on 56 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A – " on an A+ to F scale , down from the " A " earned by the first film .
Peter Travers , writing for Rolling Stone , gave the film 3 out of 4 stars and praised Rudd and Lilly , saying , " The secret of Ant - Man and the Wasp is that it works best when it does n't try so hard , when it lets charm trump excess and proves that less can be more even in the Marvel universe . "
Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun - Times praised the lightweight tone as a treat and a breath following the " dramatically heavy conclusion " of Avengers : Infinity War .
He also praised the cast , especially Rudd and Fortson , as well as the visual effects and inventive use of shrinking and growing in the action scenes .
Manohla Dargis at The New York Times felt the film 's " fast , bright and breezy " tone was a vast improvement over the first film , praising Reed 's direction .
She also praised Rudd , felt Lilly found " her groove " in the film , and wrote that the supporting cast all had " scene - steal[ing ] " sequences .
Simon Abrams of RogerEbert.com said the film was " good enough " , a " messy , but satisfying " sequel that he felt managed to juggle its many subplots while giving Rudd 's Lang some decent character development .
Varietys Owen Gleiberman called the film " faster , funnier , and more cunningly confident than the original , " and felt Reed was able to give the film enough personality to overcome its two - hour runtime and effects - heavy climax .
He did caution that this was " not quite the same thing as humanity .
But it 's enough to qualify as the miniature version . "
At The Washington Post , Ann Hornaday called the film " instantly forgettable " and criticized its plot , which she felt included some " filler " subplots , but found the film to be " no less enjoyable " because of this .
She particularly praised Rudd along with the action and effects .
Writing for the Boston Globe , Ty Burr called the film the perfect " summer air - conditioning movie " , finding it fun , funny , superficial and an improvement over the first .
He also wrote that the film had too many subplots and not enough of Pfeiffer , but was pleased with the lack of connection that the overall story had to the rest of the MCU , and with the focus on " pop trash " comedy .
Stephanie Zachareck , writing for Time , said it was " hard to actively dislike " the film , which she thought had reasonably fun action and stand - out moments between Rudd and Fortson ; but she was not as impressed with the larger , effects - heavy action sequences and felt the focus on Lilly as a better hero than Rudd was " just checking off boxes in the name of gender equality . "
ACCOLADES Hollywood Music in Media Awards !
scope="row " Screen Actors Guild Awards FUTURE Section::::Future .
Ahead of the film 's release , Reed noted that he and Marvel were " hopeful " about a third film , having discussed potential story points .
Michael Douglas also expressed interest in playing a younger version of his character Hank Pym in a prequel , something which Reed already teased back in 2015 .
SEE ALSO
* List of films featuring miniature people NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS