FIRST ORDER ( STAR WARS )
The First Order is an autocratic military dictatorship in the Star Wars franchise , introduced in the 2015 film .
Formed following the fall of the Galactic Empire after the events of Return of the Jedi ( 1983 ) , the organization has amassed its power in secret over three decades .
In The Force Awakens , the First Order is commanded by Supreme Leader Snoke and has begun executing its plan to depose the New Republic and reclaim control of the galaxy .
The Knights of Ren are a mysterious group of elite warriors within their ranks , led by Kylo Ren .
It is the canonical counterpart of the Dark Empire .
Critics and fans have noted the use of imagery highly reminiscent of Nazi Germany for the First Order in The Force Awakens , including a sequence mimicking the 1935 Nazi propaganda film Triumph of the Will .
The Force Awakens writer / director J. J. Abrams said that the First Order is inspired by the theory of ODESSA , which involved SS officers allegedly fleeing to Argentina and other countries following the aftermath of World War II .
DESCRIPTION BACKSTORY Section::::Description .
Section::::Backstory .
According to ( 2015 ) and the novel ( 2015 ) by Chuck Wendig , after the Galactic Empire was defeated in Return of the Jedi at the climactic Battle of Endor in 4 ABY , thousands of worlds rose up to join the Rebel Alliance and destroy the disorganized Imperials , who fell victim to warlordism .
The Alliance formally reorganized itself as the New Republic , and retook the Core Worlds , including the galactic capital Coruscant .
One year after Endor , the remaining Imperial Fleet made a final , massive attempt at a counter - offensive which came to a climax at the planet Jakku , the biggest battle in the war since Endor .
Ultimately , the Imperial counter - offensive was decisively defeated .
The remaining Imperial forces were pushed back to a handful of sectors on the fringe of the Outer Rim , containing only a small fraction of the galaxy 's population and industrial base .
These sectors were a heavily fortified final redoubt , and the New Republic deemed that they posed too minor of a threat to justify the high cost in life that liberating them would require .
The New Republic forced the Empire to settle for the Galactic Concordance , a humiliating armistice agreement which imposed strict disarmament plans and punishing reparations on the remaining Imperials .
Over time , elements of the Imperial Remnant reorganized itself , becoming a firmly entrenched and isolationist hermit kingdom , and spent the next three decades instigating a " cold war " against the New Republic and gradually rebuilding its military strength , secretly re - arming in violation of its armistice agreements .
The vestigial Empire secretly expanded from its original few sectors ( in the galactic north ) , aggressively pushing into the Unknown Regions ( the unexplored swaths of territory in the galactic west ) to seize new undeveloped worlds there to supplement their resource base , as well as build new shipyards and industrial infrastructure far away from the eyes of the New Republic .
The 2016 novel explained how this faction officially reorganized into the " First Order " , and that this final transition only occurred about six years before The Force Awakens .
By that time , the New Republic Senate had become divided into two parties : the Populists led by Leia Organa , who wanted to decentralize authority , and the Centrists , who wanted power to remain concentrated in a strong central government .
Many of the Centrists were former Imperials who admired the old Empire for bringing order to the galaxy , and who feared that without strong central control the New Republic would become as weak and ineffectual as the Old Republic .
Ultimately , many Centrist worlds seceded from the New Republic to reunite with the holdout Imperial remnants on the fringe of the galaxy , and formally combined into a new government called " the First Order " .
First Order conspirators publicly revealed that Leia was in fact the daughter of Darth Vader , severely harming her political standing among the remaining Populists .
The vast majority of the New Republic 's worlds remained intact , but with the exodus of the Centrists its Senate became dominated by the remaining Populists , who favored decentralization and demilitarization , not confrontation .
Even after these events , most in the remaining Senate were happy to see the Centrists go , feeling that the new First Order still controlled far too few sectors of the galaxy to ever pose a serious threat to galactic peace .
In their view , it was easier to just let the Centrist worlds peacefully leave of their own volition and rejoin the Imperial worlds rather than fight a war to keep them by force .
The formation of the First Order when the old Imperial remnants annexes the Centrist worlds ( and the New Republic 's lack of reaction to this increasing threat ) are apparently a reference to the real life inaction of the Western powers when Nazi Germany annexed Austria and the subsequent Munich Agreement letting Germany annex Sudetenland , both in 1938 .
According to Star Wars : The Force Awakens : The Visual Dictionary , a reference to this is in the name of the current Chancellor of the New Republic : " Lanever Villecham " , which is a play on words for " Neville Chamberlain " ( La - nev - er Ville - Cham ) , Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1938 , who famously proclaimed that giving the Nazis what they wanted in the Munich Agreement assured " peace for our time " .
Villecham is seen briefly in the final version of The Force Awakens but is not identified by name : more scenes with him and the Senate were filmed but deleted for time and pacing reasons .
Through as - yet - unexplained circumstances , the new " First Order " came to be ruled by the mysterious Force - wielder known as Supreme Leader Snoke .
At some point Snoke seduced Leia 's own son Ben Solo to the Dark Side of the Force , who renamed himself " Kylo Ren " .
On his turn to the Dark Side , Ben / Kylo slaughtered most of his uncle Luke Skywalker 's other Jedi apprentices ( with the rest joining him ) and destroyed his new academy .
Blaming himself , Luke fled into self - imposed exile to search for the ancient first Jedi Temple .
Kylo Ren , meanwhile , took on a position as Snoke 's right hand within the First Order 's military .
With her political standing severely weakened , and the New Republic Senate gridlocked and unwilling to recognize the First Order 's military buildup , Leia Organa decides to withdraw and form her own small private army , known as the Resistance , to fight the First Order within its own borders .
She is joined by other members of the former Rebel Alliance such as Admiral Ackbar .
Publicly the New Republic continues to disavow direct association with the Resistance to maintain plausible deniability , and though the majority of the Senate does not want to intervene against the First Order , several Senators privately channel funds and resources to the Resistance .
This state of affairs continued on for the next six years until the events of The Force Awakens .
Comic book writer Charles Soule , creator of the 2015 Marvel Comics series , explained that immediately prior to the events of The Force Awakens , " The New Republic and the First Order are in a position of detente , and while there have been a few small skirmishes between the Resistance and the First Order , it 's very much a sort of cold war . "
MILITARY Section::::Military .
The First Order 's handful of sectors simply do not possess the galaxy - wide resources the old Empire used to be able to draw upon , and in addition the armistice treaties with the New Republic put strict limitations on how many ships it could physically build .
Therefore , unlike the old Galactic Empire 's swarm tactics , the First Order 's military has had to adapt to a more " quality over quantity " philosophy , making efficient use of what few resources it has .
STAR FLEET
First Order Star Destroyers Section::::Star fleet .
The First Order lacked the resources to build and crew thousands of Star Destroyers .
While its fleet is a fraction of the size of the Imperial Fleet at its height , on a one - for - one basis its new ships are much more powerful .
In addition , they boast thirty years ' worth of advances in military technologies compared to the old Empire .
As a result , the First Order now deploys starships such as the new Resurgent - class Star Destroyer , nearly twice as large as the old Imperial - class Star Destroyer which it replaced as the mainstay of the First Order fleet .
With a naval doctrine that accepted the renewed importance of starfighters within their overall strategy , the Resurgent - class adopted the carrier - centric designs of the Galactic Republic 's Venator - class Star Destroyer .
The TIE / fo Corps
The First Order 's TIE fighters , designated TIE / fo , are more advanced than the old Empire 's TIE / ln model , and show greater concern for unit stamina and survivability .
The First Order 's Special Forces use a more heavily armed two - man TIE / sf variant .
Visually , their color scheme is reversed from the old Imperial design : the Empire 's TIE Fighters have black solar panels on a light grey metal body frame , while First Order TIE Fighters have white solar panels on a dark metal frame .
Troop Transports
For space to surface delivery , the First Order is also seen deploying several standard troop transports .
Elite units and high value command personnel such as Kylo Ren use the Upsilon - class command shuttle , a stylistic evolution of the old Imperial Lambda - class T-4a shuttle ( but without the third fin on top , and now sporting large wings that retract upon themselves on landing ) .
The Last Jedi
The Last Jedi introduces several more ships of the First Order .
Mandator IV - class Siege Dreadnoughts are larger but rarer than Resurgent - class Star Destroyers , used as orbital bombardment platforms which can functionally wipe out entire planets ' population centers ( albeit through conventional weapons , just short of being considered super - weapons ) .
Dwarfing even these other vessels are Supreme Leader Snoke 's personal flagship and mobile capital , the Mega - class Star Dreadnought Supremacy : a wing - shaped vessel wider than it is long , the size of a small country .
Supremacy measures 60 kilometers at its greatest width — equal to about 18 Resurgent - class Star Destroyers lined up end to end .
The Last Jedi also introduces a new starfighter element to the First Order fleet , the TIE Silencer superiority fighter .
Much as TIE Interceptors were the next generation fighter starting to phase out the original Imperial TIE Fighters , TIE Silencers are a next - generation fighter given only to the most elite units .
Visually they somewhat resemble a cross between a TIE Interceptor and Darth Vader 's TIE Advanced x1 prototype , being wider and more elongated , while boasting heavier weapons , shields , etc .
to be able to face X - Wings head - on .
Kylo Ren pilots his own personal TIE Silencer .
Their technical designation is " TIE / vn " ( because in earlier drafts , the ship was called " TIE Vendetta " ) .
A major plot point in The Last Jedi is that the First Order has developed new " hyperspace tracking " technology , allowing them to continue to chase enemy vessels through hyperspace from one jump to the next ( until one or the other runs out of fuel ) .
This technology was first mentioned in passing in Rogue One as another research project the Empire was starting to develop almost forty years before .
GROUND FORCES Section::::Ground forces .
The First Order employs a quality - over - quantity philosophy with its soldiers and personnel .
Unable to conscript trillions of soldiers to fill its Stormtrooper ranks , yet unwilling to invest huge resources in breeding a rapidly produced clone army ( like the original Stormtroopers at the end of the Clone Wars ) , First Order Stormtroopers are trained from birth , raised their entire lives for no other purpose .
First Order soldiers and crews have constantly trained for combat in war games and simulations , making them much more effective one - on - one than the endless waves of Stormtrooper conscripts fielded by the old Empire .
First Order Stormtroopers are regularly put through mental indoctrination and propaganda programs , to make sure that they remain fanatically loyal and never hesitate or question orders .
Being taken from their families at birth , these soldiers are not even given individual names for themselves but merely serial numbers , such as " FN-2187 " .
This was the name Finn , a defector and Resistance hero , was originally given .
His current name , given by Poe Dameron , derives from the FN , which was the only part Dameron was able to remember easily .
First Order Stormtroopers are formally deployed in squads of ten , with the tenth spot reserved for a heavy weapons specialist as the needs of the mission require : usually a heavy gunner , but sometimes also flamethrower troops , or riot troops equipped with energy batons ( which are incidentally capable of blocking a lightsaber ) .
The design of the armour of regular and heavy gunner Stormtroopers bears significant resemblances to the design used by the Galactic Empire , such as the helmet visor , nasal filters , and overall shape .
However , the filter was extended , among other practical features .
According to the famed First Order officer Captain Phasma , not even a Wookiee ( the species Chewbacca belonged to ) could crush the said armour .
Some stormtroopers held high ranks — a significant improvement from the one - rank system of the Empire .
These were indicated by the colour of shoulder pauldrons .
In the rare instance of a stormtrooper earning the rank of Captain , they often earned a blasterproof cape .
Occasionally , they modify their outfit even further — Captain Phasma made blasterproof , chrome copies of all her equipment and greatly improved vision modes of her helmet 's visor .
Captain Cardinal , the bodyguard of a First Order founding father , received almost all - red armour from his superior as a sign of trust .
As a heavy siege weapon , the First Order also fields its own evolution of the old AT - series of armored transports , the AT - M6 .
Dwarfing the older AT - AT , the AT - M6 has numerous design improvements including heavy serrated cable - cutters mounted on its legs — to avoid being tripped up again like AT - AT 's were at the Battle of Hoth .
These cutters are positioned in such a way that the AT - M6 walks on its " knuckles " instead of the pads of its feet , which — combined with a heavy siege cannon which gives it a hunched - over appearance — gives the AT - M6 an almost gorilla - like profile compared to the more elephant - like AT - AT .
APPEARANCES
THE FORCE AWAKENS ( 2015 ) Section::::Appearances .
Section::::The Force Awakens ( 2015 ) .
In the film , the First Order is led by a mysterious figure named Snoke , who has assumed the title of Supreme Leader .
Like the Empire before them , the Order commands a vast force of stormtroopers .
The First Order uses regular and Special Forces versions of the Empire 's venerable TIE fighter .
Its primary base of operations is Starkiller Base , a fortified ice planet which houses a superweapon capable of destroying entire star systems across the galaxy by firing through hyperspace .
The base commander of Starkiller is General Hux , a ruthless young officer dedicated to the Order .
Snoke is a powerful figure in the dark side of the Force and has corrupted Ben , the son of Han Solo and Leia Organa who had been an apprentice to his uncle , the Jedi Master Luke Skywalker .
Masked and using the name Kylo Ren , he is one of Snoke 's enforcers , much like his grandfather Darth Vader had been the enforcer of Emperor Palpatine during the days of the Empire decades earlier .
Kylo is the master of the Knights of Ren , a mysterious group of elite warriors .
Kylo and Hux are rivals for Snoke 's approval , and the third member of the " commanding triumvirate " of the First Order is the formidable Captain Phasma , the commander of the stormtroopers .
Kylo is searching for Luke , who vanished some years earlier .
Snoke believes that as long as Luke lives , a new generation of Jedi Knights can rise again .
The First Order launches a preemptive strike on Hosnian Prime , the New Republic 's current capital world ( as well as Hosnian Prime 's Sun and the other planets in the ' Hosnian System ' ( Hosnian Prime 's solar system ) , as well as the spaceships there ) , by test - firing the Starkiller weapon .
This devastating first strike takes the New Republic completely by surprise , not only killing most of its leadership in the Galactic Senate , but wiping out a substantial portion of the New Republic 's core military fleets .
This paves the way for a resulting Blitzkrieg of the rest of the galaxy by the First Order , using the disproportionately powerful military it has rebuilt over the past three decades .
Kylo fails to retrieve the map fragment that would lead him to Luke , and the Resistance manages to destroy Starkiller Base moments before it is able to fire on the Resistance base on D'Qar , though Kylo and General Hux are able to escape the explosion .
THE LAST JEDI ( 2017 )
Section::::The
Last Jedi ( 2017 ) .
The Last Jedi follows immediately after the events of The Force Awakens , and the narrative narrowly focuses on the First Order 's fleet attacking and chasing the Resistance from their only base ( on the planet D'Qar ) .
As a result , the First Order 's intended galaxy - wide offensive against the decapitated New Republic is only alluded to in passing – and indeed , has only just begun , given that the events of The Last Jedi itself only span a few days or weeks .
The First Order 's main fleet , led by General Hux and Kylo Ren , assault the Resistance base on D'Qar now that they have discovered its location ( in a conventional attack , as their original plan to obliterate it using Starkiller Base failed ) .
The Resistance manages to evacuate most of its personnel and equipment from the surface before it is destroyed by orbital bombardment , but then have to fight their way through the First Order blockade .
Poe
Dameron rashly leads an assault against a Mandator IV - class Siege Dreadnought – one of only a handful of heavy orbital bombardment platforms in the enemy fleet – and manages to destroy it , but at the cost of the entire bomber wing of the Resistance .
Kylo Ren then personally leads an assault in his TIE Silencer which destroys the rest of the Resistance fighter wing in its own carrier 's hangar bay .
Ren hesitates to fire on the command bridge of the Resistance carrier , containing his mother Leia Organa , but his support craft carry through with their attack , wiping out all of the Resistance leadership ( including Admiral Ackbar ) , except for Leia herself ( who , while blown out into space , uses the Force to pull herself back to the ship ) .
Vice Admiral Holdo assumes control of the Resistance fleet while Leia recovers .
The small Resistance fleet manages to escape via a hyperspace jump , only for the First Order fleet to reappear at their location moments later : the First Order developed a new " hyperspace tracking " technology , making it impossible to evade them simply by jumping away .
The Resistance ships would simply exhaust their fuel by making more hyperspace jumps , without shaking the First Order fleet , so they continue to flee at sub - light speed ( at which they are slightly faster than the larger and more powerful First Order ships ) .
This only forestalls the inevitable , however , as their sub - light fuel at continuous full speed will still be exhausted in a day .
This devolves into a siege - like battle of attrition , as one by one the smaller Resistance ships run out of fuel and are destroyed by the pursuing First Order fleet .
Ultimately , Supreme Leader Snoke and Kylo Ren trick Rey to come to Snoke 's flagship , the Mega - class Star Dreadnought Supremacy .
Ordered to kill Rey , Kylo Ren kills Snoke instead and replaces him as Supreme Leader of the First Order .
He offers Rey that they could rule the galaxy together , but she refuses , as he almost returned to the Light Side of the Force after Snoke 's death .
They resume fighting and she manages to knock him unconscious , then escapes the ship .
When General Hux arrives , he blames the murder on Rey , and Hux begrudgingly accepts his new rank .
Meanwhile , Poe Dameron stages a mutiny against Holdo , believing she had no plan but to run until their fuel ran out .
As it turns out , however , she had a plan , but did n't trust him after the fiasco of his assault on the dreadnaught : she would remain to pilot their last surviving ship ( their command carrier , Raddus ) , while all of their personnel fled in cloaked shuttles to an old Rebel Alliance base on the salt flats planet Crait .
The First Order discovered the ruse , however , destroying most of the shuttlecraft .
Already determined to lay down her life for the Resistance , Holdo then directs the command carrier on a suicide run , making a faster - than - light jump directly into Snoke 's flagship – cutting it in half , and destroying much of the First Order fleet in the wreckage .
With the old Rebel base on Crait hardened against orbital bombardment , Kylo Ren commands Hux to land all of their surviving ground forces to wipe them out : only a few dozen Resistance members are left alive , but Leia is among them , and if they escape they could rally the rest of the galaxy against them .
Leia sends out transmissions to allies " in the Outer Rim " begging for aid , but they inexplicably do not appear .
Just as the First Order breaches the base , Luke Skywalker appears to challenge them .
A full barrage by their artillery has no effect on Luke , so Kylo Ren descends to duel him in person – but Luke easily dodges the attacks of his former apprentice , humiliating Ren as he frustrates himself in empty rage .
Ren finally manages to land a hit – only to realize that Luke is not truly present on Crait at all , but in an unprecedented display of his power using the Force , projected his appearance halfway across the galaxy .
Luke tricked Ren to buy time for the Resistance to escape the planet , and humiliate Ren in front of his new - won empire – though the strain of this Force - projection is fatal to Luke , and he peacefully becomes one with the Force after he buys enough time for the remaining members of the Resistance to escape .
The handful of surviving Resistance members escape on the Millenium Falcon with Rey .
While the Resistance has been functionally destroyed , their one ship contains the seeds to destroy the First Order :
Leia and her allies aboard live to rally the remnants of the New Republic in the rest of the galaxy , while Rey saved all of the sacred Jedi texts , to one day give rise to new generation of Jedi to fight the First Order .
EPISODE IX Section::::Episode IX .
The First Order will appear in .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Robbie Collin of The Telegraph described the disfigured and skeletal Snoke as a " sepulchral horror " and referred to Hux as " a spitting fanatic of the First Order whose every gesture speaks of utter contempt for , well , everyone . "
COMPARISONS TO NAZI GERMANY AND ODESSA Section::::Comparisons to Nazi Germany and ODESSA .
Critics and fans have noted the use of imagery highly reminiscent of Nazi Germany for the First Order in The Force Awakens , including a sequence mimicking the 1935 Nazi propaganda film Triumph of the Will .
The Force Awakens writer / director J. J. Abrams said that the First Order is inspired by the theory of ODESSA , which involved SS officers allegedly fleeing to Argentina and other countries following the aftermath of World War II .
Abrams explained : REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Cloned , Recruited , and Kidnapped :
Military Evolution in the Star Wars Universe Tor.com
March 30 , 2016