HOT AND SOUR SOUP
Hot and sour soup is a variety of soups from several Asian culinary traditions .
In all cases , the soup contains ingredients to make it both spicy and sour .
NORTH AMERICA
UNITED STATES Section::::North America .
Section::::United States .
Soup preparation may use chicken or pork broth , or may be meat - free .
Common key ingredients in the American Chinese version include bamboo shoots , toasted sesame oil , wood ear , cloud ear fungus , day lily buds , vinegar , egg , corn starch , and white pepper .
Other ingredients include button mushrooms and small slices of tofu skin .
It is comparatively thicker than the Chinese cuisine versions due to the addition of cornstarch .
This soup is usually considered a healthy option at most Chinese establishments and , other than being high in sodium , is a very healthy soup overall .
EAST ASIA
CHINA Section::::East Asia .
Section::::China .
" Hot and sour soup " is a Chinese soup claimed variously by the regional cuisines of Beijing and Sichuan as a regional dish .
The Chinese hot and sour soup is usually meat - based , and often contains ingredients such as day lily buds , wood ear fungus , bamboo shoots , and tofu , in a broth that is sometimes flavored with pork blood .
Sometimes , the soup would also have carrots and pieces of pork .
It is typically made hot ( spicy ) by red peppers or white pepper , and sour by vinegar .
JAPAN Section::::Japan .
In Japan , ramen noodles are usually added to hot and sour soup to make suratan - men ( or sanratan - men ) or " hot and sour soup noodles " .
SOUTH ASIA INDIA Section::::South Asia .
Section::::India .
In India , this soup is made with red and green chillies , ginger , carrots , snow peas , tofu , soy sauce , rice vinegar and a pinch of sugar .
It is viewed in India as being a Chinese soup .
PAKISTAN Section::::Pakistan .
Hot and sour soup is usually made in Pakistan with chicken , carrots , cabbage , corn flour , eggs , vinegar , chili , soya sauce and salt .
It may also contain bean sprout and capsicum .
SOUTHEAST ASIA
CAMBODIA Section::::Southeast Asia .
Section::::Cambodia .
Samlor machu pkong or " Sour Shrimp Stew " is a Cambodian sour soup flavored with lemon , chilis , prawns and/or shrimp .
One of the most popular sour soups in Cambodia , it is eaten most often on special occasions .
Samlar machu yuan or " Vietnam sour soup " is another common hot and sour soup of Cambodia originating among the Khmer Krom of the Mekong Delta region ( hence , the name ) .
It is made with fish , usually mudfish , walking catfish or tilapia , that has first been fried or broiled then added to the broth .
Chicken may also be substituted .
The ingredients which give the stew its characteristic flavor may vary depending on what is available locally to the cook .
Possible ingredients include various combinations of pineapple , tomato , ngo gai , fried garlic , papaya , lotus root , Thai basil ( ) and Thai chili .
THAILAND
Section::::Thailand .
Tom yum is a Thai soup flavored with lemon grass , lime , kaffir lime leaves , galangal , fish sauce and chilis .
Sour curry ( Thai : แกงส้ม , RTGS :
Kaeng som ) is a soup - like spicy and sour Thai curry .
PHILIPPINES
Section::::Philippines .
Sinigang is a Filipino soup or stew characterized by its sour and savoury taste most often associated with tamarind .
VIETNAM Section::::Vietnam .
Canh chua ( literally " sour soup " ) , a sour soup indigenous to the Mekong River region of southern Vietnam , is similar to the Cambodian version .
It is typically made with fish from the Mekong River or shrimp , pineapple , tomatoes ( and sometimes also other vegetables ) , and bean sprouts , and flavored with tamarind and the lemony - scented herb ngò ôm ( Limnophila aromatica ) .
When made in style of a hot pot , canh chua is called lẩu canh chua .
SEE ALSO
* Egg drop soup * List of Chinese dishes * List of Chinese soups
* List of soups * List of vegetable soups REFERENCES