LEEK
The leek is a vegetable , a cultivar of Allium ampeloprasum , the broadleaf wild leek .
The edible part of the plant is a bundle of leaf sheaths that is sometimes erroneously called a stem or stalk .
The genus Allium also contains the onion , garlic , shallot , scallion , chive , and Chinese onion .
Historically , many scientific names were used for leeks , but they are now all treated as cultivars of A. ampeloprasum .
The name ' leek ' developed from the Old English word leac .
Three closely related vegetables , elephant garlic , kurrat and Persian leek or Tareh , are also cultivars of A. ampeloprasum , although different in their uses as food .
FORM Section::::Form .
Rather than forming a tight bulb like the onion , the leek produces a long cylinder of bundled leaf sheaths that are generally blanched by pushing soil around them ( trenching ) .
They are often sold as small seedlings in flats that are started off early in greenhouses , to be planted out as weather permits .
Once established in the garden , leeks are hardy ; many varieties can be left in the ground during the winter to be harvested as needed .
CULTIVARS Section::::Cultivars .
Leek cultivars may be treated as a single cultivar group , e.g. as A. ampeloprasum ' Leek Group ' .
The cultivars can be subdivided in several ways , but the most common types are " summer leeks " , intended for harvest in the season when planted , and overwintering leeks , meant to be harvested in the spring of the year following planting .
Summer leek types are generally smaller than overwintering types ; overwintering types are generally more strongly flavored .
Cultivars include ' King Richard ' and ' Tadorna Blue ' .
GROWING Section::::Growing .
Leeks are easy to grow from seed and tolerate standing in the field for an extended harvest , which takes place up to 6 months from planting .
The soil in which it is grown has to be loose and drained well ; leek can be grown in the same regions where onions can be grown .
Leeks usually reach maturity in the autumn months .
Leeks can be bunched and harvested early when they are about the size of a finger or pencil , or they can be thinned and allowed to grow to a much larger mature size .
Hilling leeks can produce better specimens .
Leeks suffer from insect pests including the thrips species Thrips tabaci and the leek moth .
Leeks are also susceptible to leek rust ( Puccinia allii ) .
CUISINE Section::::Cuisine .
Leeks have a mild , onion - like taste .
In its raw state , the vegetable is crunchy and firm .
The edible portions of the leek are the white base of the leaves ( above the roots and stem base ) , the light green parts , and to a lesser extent the dark green parts of the leaves .
The dark green portion is usually discarded because it has a tough texture , but it can be sautéed , or more commonly added to stock for flavor .
A few leaves are sometimes tied with twine and other herbs to form a bouquet garni .
Leeks are typically chopped into slices 5–10 mm thick .
The slices have a tendency to fall apart , due to the layered structure of the leek .
The different ways of preparing the vegetable are : *
Boiling turns it soft and mild in taste .
( Care should be taken to chop the vegetable , or else the intact fibers that run the length of the vegetable will tangle into a ball while chewing . )
* Frying leaves it crunchier and preserves the taste .
* Raw leeks can be used in salads , doing especially well when they are the prime ingredient .
*
In Turkish cuisine , leeks are chopped into thick slices , then boiled and separated into leaves , and finally filled with a filling usually containing rice , herbs ( generally parsley and dill ) , onion , and black pepper .
For sarma with olive oil , currants , pine nuts , and cinnamon are added , and for sarma with meat , minced meat is added to the filling .
In Turkey , especially zeytinyağlı pırasa ( leek with olive oil ) , ekşili pırasa ( sour leek ) , etli pırasa ( leek with meat ) , pırasa musakka ( leek musakka ) , pırasalı börek ( börek with leek ) , and pırasa köftesi leek meatball are also cooked .
Leeks are an ingredient of cock - a - leekie soup , leek and potato soup , and vichyssoise , as well as plain leek soup .
Because of their symbolism in Wales ( see below ) , they have come to be used extensively in that country 's cuisine .
Elsewhere in Britain , leeks have come back into favor only in the last 50 years or so , having been overlooked for several centuries .
HISTORICAL CONSUMPTION Section::::Historical consumption .
The Hebrew Bible talks of חציר , identified by commentators as leek , and says it is abundant in Egypt .
Dried specimens from archaeological sites in ancient Egypt , as well as wall carvings and drawings , indicate that the leek was a part of the Egyptian diet from at least the second millennium BCE .
Texts also show that it was grown in Mesopotamia from the beginning of the second millennium BCE .
The leek was the favorite vegetable of the Emperor Nero , who consumed it in soup or in oil , believing it beneficial to the quality of his voice .
CULTURAL SIGNIFICANCE Section::::Cultural significance .
The leek is one of the national emblems of Wales .
Daffodil ( in Welsh , the daffodil is known as " Peter 's leek " , Cenhinen Bedr ) on St. David 's Day .
According to one legend , King Cadwaladr of Gwynedd ordered his soldiers to identify themselves by wearing the vegetable on their helmets in an ancient battle against the Saxons that took place in a leek field .
The Elizabethan poet Michael Drayton stated , in contrast , that the tradition was a tribute to Saint David , who ate only leeks when he was fasting .
Whatever the case , the leek has been known to be a symbol of Wales for a long time ; Shakespeare , for example , refers to the custom of wearing a leek as an " ancient tradition " in Henry V.
In the play , Henry tells the Welsh officer Fluellen that he , too , is wearing a leek " for I am Welsh , you know , good countryman .
" The 1985 and 1990 British one pound coins bear the design of a leek in a coronet , representing Wales .
Alongside the other national floral emblems of countries currently and formerly in the Commonwealth or part of the United Kingdom ( including the English Tudor Rose , Scottish thistle , Irish shamrock , Canadian maple leaf , and Indian lotus ) , the Welsh leek appeared on the coronation gown of Elizabeth II .
It was designed by Norman Hartnell ; when Hartnell asked if he could exchange the leek for the more aesthetically pleasing Welsh daffodil , he was told no .
Perhaps the most visible use of the leek , however , is as the cap badge of the Welsh Guards , a regiment within the Household Division of the British Army .
In Romania , the leek is also widely considered a symbol of Oltenia , a historical region in the southwestern part of the country .
GALLERY SEE ALSO * Allium tricoccum , a North American plant commonly known as " wild leek " * Culture of Wales * Farfetch'd , a Pokémon that carries a spring leek
* Hatsune Miku , whose character item , Green Onion , is often confused with a leek *
Kurrat , Egyptian leek * Laukaz , a rune that has been speculated to mean " leek " * List of vegetables * Loituma Girl , also known as " Leekspin " * Scallion * Welsh onion
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Allium ampeloprasum L. on US National PLANTS Database * Allium porrum L. on US National PLANTS Database * Allium ampeloprasum , Porrum on Floridata
*
Leek : Plants For a Future database
* Food Museum page
* National Symbols of Wales