WHISKEY TANGO FOXTROT ( FILM ) Whiskey Tango Foxtrot is a 2016 American biographical war comedy - drama film directed by Glenn Ficarra and John Requa , and written by Robert Carlock , based on the memoir The Taliban Shuffle :
Strange Days in Afghanistan and Pakistan by Kim Barker .
The film stars Tina Fey , Margot Robbie , Martin Freeman , Christopher Abbott , Alfred Molina , and Billy Bob Thornton .
It was released on March 4 , 2016 by Paramount Pictures .
It received mixed reviews from critics who praised the acting but criticsed the predictable screenplay and execution and was a box office failure grossing only $ 24.9 million against its $ 35 million budget .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 2003 New York City , dissatisfied with the state of her career covering low - profile stories , television journalist Kim Baker ( Tina Fey ) agrees to take a short assignment as a war correspondent in Afghanistan during Operation Enduring Freedom , to the disappointment of her boyfriend Chris ( Josh Charles ) , who also spends a lot of time traveling .
Assigned low - budget living quarters with other international journalists
, she develops a friendship with noted BBC correspondent Tanya Vanderpoel ( Margot Robbie ) and lecherous Scottish freelance
photographer Iain MacKelpie ( Martin Freeman ) .
After a period of adjustment aided by her Afghan " fixer " Fahim Ahmadzai ( Christopher Abbott ) , she begins taking well to the assignment , eliciting frank remarks on camera from soldiers questioning the value of their assignment there , and putting herself in harm 's way to capture combat incidents on video .
American Marine commander General ( previously Colonel ) Hollanek ( Billy Bob Thornton ) takes a dim view of her as an inexperienced nuisance .
Despite the danger , Kim stays in Afghanistan for months , then years beyond her original assignment .
She catches Chris unprepared with a middle - of - the - night video call , and finds him with another woman , ending their relationship .
Against her better judgment , she begins a sexual relationship with Iain , which over time also develops into a more personal one .
Although her status as a woman presents challenges in an Afghan Islamic society which places restrictive roles on women , she also uses it to her advantage , gaining access to women in a village who explain that they 've been sabotaging the US - built well because they welcome the daily walk to the river away from the men , and recklessly , carrying a camera under a burqa to record a religious demonstration .
She also walks a tightrope , taking advantage of the thinly - veiled sexual interest of Afghan Attorney General Ali Massoud Sadiq ( Alfred Molina ) to use him as a source .
Fahim – who treated opium addicts before the war – cautions her , pointing out that danger can be like a drug .
Despite their mutual friendliness , Kim remains in competition with other journalists for stories and for resources from their employers back home .
After three years in Afghanistan , Kim flies to New York to argue for more support from her network 's new boss , only to discover that Tanya is slated to take over from her .
Meanwhile , Iain is kidnapped for ransom while traveling cross - country to cover a developing story that Iain had earlier offered to bring Kim in on .
Kim returns " home " to Afghanistan , where she blackmails her " special friend " , Ali , for information about Iain 's whereabouts , and impresses upon Hollanek the political value to him of rescuing Iain .
The mission – accompanied by Kim 's cameraman – is a success , both militarily and journalistically .
However , shortly after Iain 's rescue Kim becomes disillusioned with both her tentative relationship and her station .
She then bids farewell to her colleagues and to Fahim , and returns to the U.S. to stay .
After returning , she looks up a Marine ( Evan Jonigkeit ) who was transferred , apparently because of his on - camera comments to her , and subsequently lost both of his legs to an IED .
She tries to apologize for the consequences of her actions , but he refuses to let her take the blame .
She moves on to an on - camera desk job , where she later finds herself interviewing Iain , who is going to be in New York soon as part of a tour for his new book , and who invites her to meet him for coffee .
CAST
* Tina Fey as Kim Baker , a cable - news reporter
* Margot Robbie as Tanya Vanderpoel , a British BBC News TV journalist whom Kim admires and befriends .
* Martin Freeman as Iain MacKelpie , Kim 's unexpected love interest and a dedicated Scottish photojournalist .
* Christopher Abbott as Fahim Ahmadzai , who acts as driver , translator and all - around handyman for reporters .
*
Billy Bob Thornton as Brigadier General Hollanek , US Marine Corps , a military man who initially scares Kim .
Hollanek is referred to variously as " Colonel " and " General " throughout the film , but he is credited as " General , " despite his presence in the field .
* Alfred Molina as Ali Massoud Sadiq , a local official who has a romantic interest in her .
* Sheila Vand as Shakira El - Khoury , a Lebanese reporter who works alongside Kim and Tanya .
* Nicholas Braun as Tall Brian , Kim 's cameraman * Steve Peacocke as Nic , Kim 's alpha male bodyguard * Evan Jonigkeit as Lance Corporal Coughlin , a member of 3rd Battalion , 5th Marines when Baker is embedded .
* Scott Takeda as Ed Faber * Josh Charles as Chris * Cherry Jones as Geri Taub * Sterling K. Brown as Sergeant Hurd , another member of 3rd Battalion , 5th Marines .
* Thomas Kretschmann as Airplane Passenger PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In February 2014 , Tina Fey confirmed that her production company , Little Stranger , would adapt the memoir by Kim Barker of the Chicago Tribune into a film .
Fey would star in the lead role in the film , which would be produced by Lorne Michaels and written by Robert Carlock .
On June 30 , 2014 , Paramount tapped Glenn Ficarra and John Requa to direct the film .
On October 22 , 2014 , Margot Robbie joined the cast to play a competing reporter alongside Fey 's character .
On November 20 , 2014 , Martin Freeman was in talks to play Fey 's character 's unexpected love interest , a dedicated Scottish photojournalist .
On January 10 , 2015 , it was reported that Nikolaj Coster - Waldau was in talks to join the film for a male lead role , although he did not ultimately star in the film .
On February 2 , 2015 , Christopher Abbott joined the film 's cast .
On February 3 , 2015 , Nicholas Braun joined the film to play Tall Brian , Fey 's character 's cameraman , and the film was titled as Fun House .
On February 9 , 2015 , Steve Peacocke was set to star in the film , playing Nic , Fey 's character 's alpha male bodyguard .
On February 11 , 2015 , confirmed cast was announced , with Billy Bob Thornton , Alfred Molina , Sheila Vand , and Evan Jonigkeit also joining the cast of the film , in which Vand would play Shakira El - Khoury , a Lebanese reporter who works alongside Kim and Tanya .
Fey confirmed that the film 's title would be Whiskey Tango Foxtrot in an interview with USA Today .
Kim Barker was changed to a cable - news reporter named " Baker . "
Margot Robbie is playing Tanya Vanderpoel , a British TV journalist whom Kim admires and befriends .
Christopher Abbott plays Afghan " fixer " Fahim Ahmadzai , who acts as driver , translator and all - around handyman for reporters .
Martin Freeman is Iain MacKelpie , a Scottish war photographer who is Kim 's love interest .
Rounding out the ensemble cast is Billy Bob Thornton as General Hollanek , a military man who initially scares Kim , and Alfred Molina is a local official who has a romantic interest in her .
The title is a NATO alphabet spelling of WTF , which stands for " What the fuck ? "
FILMING Section::::Filming .
On February 3 , 2015 , the Albuquerque Journal reported that filming was underway in Santa Fe , New Mexico .
Fey was spotted filming in the Santa Fe University of Art and Design .
On February 11 , 2015 , Paramount also confirmed that principal photography had commenced on the film in New Mexico .
It was filmed in part at the historic Scottish Rite Temple in Santa Fe .
Production on the film concluded on April 10 , 2015 .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film was originally titled The Taliban Shuffle and Fun House , before settling on Whiskey Tango Foxtrot .
It was released on March 4 , 2016 .
At the beginning of the rolling credits is a dedication to Fey 's father , Donald Henry Fey , who died in 2015 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Whiskey Tango Foxtrot was released on DVD and Blu - ray on June 28 , 2016 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Whiskey Tango Foxtrot grossed $ 23.1 million in North America and $ 1.8 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 24.9 million , against a production budget of $ 35 million .
In the United States and Canada , pre - release tracking suggested the film would gross $ 10–12 million from 2,374 theaters in its opening weekend , trailing fellow newcomers Zootopia ( $ 60–70 million projection ) and London Has Fallen ( $ 20–23 million projection ) .
The film ended up grossing $ 7.6 million in its opening weekend , finishing below expectations and 4th at the box office .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 68 % based on 179 reviews , with an average rating of 6.3/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " While WTF is far from FUBAR , Tina Fey and Martin Freeman are just barely enough to overcome the picture 's glib predictability and limited worldview .
"
Metacritic gives the film a weighted average score of 57 out of 100 , based on 44 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B " on an A+ to F scale .
SEE ALSO
* Lara Logan , the first female reporter to cover the war in Afghanistan
* Whitewashing in film , due to casting of white actors in Afghan roles REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS