THE CORONER
The Coroner is a BBC Birmingham daytime drama series of 20 episodes starring Claire Goose as Jane Kennedy , a coroner based in a fictional South Devon coastal town .
Matt Bardock stars as Detective Sergeant Davey Higgins .
The BBC announced on 2 March 2017 that there would be no further series .
SYNOPSIS
Section::::Synopsis .
Jane Kennedy returns to Lighthaven as the local coroner .
She works with Davey Higgins , a Detective Sergeant in the South Dart police ; they were childhood sweethearts until he broke her heart .
They investigate any sudden , violent or unexplained deaths in the South Hams district of South Devon .
Also featuring :
Beth , Kennedy 's 15-year - old daughter ; Judith , Kennedy 's mother ; Judith 's boyfriend , Mick Sturrock ; Clint Holman , Coroner 's Officer .
CAST
* Claire Goose as Jane Kennedy , Coroner * Matt Bardock as Davey Higgins , Detective Sergeant
* Beatie Edney as Judith Kennedy , Jane 's mother
* Ivan Kaye as Mick Sturrock , landlord of The Black Dog * Oliver Gomm as Clint Holman , Coroner 's Officer * Grace Hogg - Robinson as Beth Kennedy , Jane 's daughter Section::::Cast .
Sally Abbott created The Coroner from an idea by Will Trotter , executive producer and head of BBC Drama Birmingham , about a woman coroner aged about 40 and in a location such as the Cotswolds or Devon .
The series would have self - contained stories with drama and humour ; a formula successfully used in Father Brown from the same production team .
The characters , Jane and Davey , were based on Katharine Hepburn and Spencer Tracey in Adam 's Rib with the unresolved sexual tension between them .
Abbott wrote the Davey character with Matt Bardock in mind .
She created four other characters to complete the cast .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
According to the BBC , the series is not based on , or inspired by , M R Hall 's best - selling books including The Coroner .
Hall stated he was " unhappy " about the " enormous similarities " , but the BBC say any resemblance with his booksalso about an unusually pro - active , Land Rover driving , forty - something female solicitor who after a failed relationship returns to the West Country to take up the post of coronerare purely coincidental .
The production office was located at Dartington where some interior scenes were filmed .
Filming began in mid - April 2015 for 15 weeks .
The episodes were divided into blocks of two with the same director , assistant director , and director of photography .
Locations included Hope Cove , Dartmouth , Torquay , and Broadsands Beach , Paignton .
The Mansion , now a community building , in Totnes was used as the Coroners Court .
A brass plate was attached to the brickwork .
The exterior and interior of Oldway Mansion is used as Lighthaven 's town hall .
The Old Customs House in Bayard 's Cove , Dartmouth is the location of the Coroners office .
The set for The Black Dog Inn is the derelict Crooked Spaniards Inn , Cargreen , Cornwall .
The tower at Gribben Head , Cornwall featured in the first episode .
CANCELLATION Section::::Cancellation .
The BBC announced on 2 March 2017 that there would be no further series .
EPISODES SERIES 1 ( 2015 )
SERIES 2 ( 2016 )
DVD Section::::DVD .
Both series are available on DVD in the UK .
They have also been released in Germany and Australia .
All of these releases are PAL format .
NTSC format DVDs will be released in the USA in 2018 .
Although being one of the first BBC drama series to be shot in 4 K resolution , there have been no blu - rays released in either 4 K or high definition in any region to date .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS