JOHN WICK :
CHAPTER 2 John Wick :
Chapter 2 is a 2017 American neo - noir action thriller film directed by Chad Stahelski and written by Derek Kolstad .
The second installment in the John Wick film series following John Wick , the plot follows hitman John Wick , who goes on the run after a bounty is placed on him .
It stars Keanu Reeves , Common , Laurence Fishburne , Riccardo Scamarcio , Ruby Rose , John Leguizamo and Ian McShane , and marks the first collaboration between Reeves and Fishburne since appearing together in The Matrix trilogy .
Principal photography began on October 26 , 2015 , in New York City .
The film premiered in Los Angeles on January 30 , 2017 , and was theatrically released in the United States on February 10 , 2017 .
The film was met with positive reviews from critics , attaining praise for the action sequences , direction , editing , visual style , pacing and the performances of the cast , especially Keanu Reeves as John Wick .
The film grossed $ 171.5 million worldwide , over four times its $ 40 million budget and nearly twice the $ 88 million gross of the original film .
A sequel , titled , is set to be released on May 17 , 2019 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Four days after the events of the first film , former assassin John Wick finds his stolen 1969 Ford Mustang Mach 1 at a chop shop owned by Abram Tarasov , brother of Viggo and uncle of Iosef .
John dispatches Tarasov 's men in a violent rampage that heavily damages the Mustang .
He then spares Tarasov under the auspices of peace , and returns home .
After Aurelio takes John 's Mustang for repairs , John is visited by Italian crime lord Santino D'Antonio .
It is revealed that to complete his " impossible task"—which allowed him to retire and marry Helen —
John asked Santino for help .
As a form of contract , Santino swore John to a " Marker , " an unbreakable promise symbolized by a " blood oath " medallion .
Santino presents the medallion to demand services from John , but John declines , claiming that he is retired .
In retaliation , Santino destroys John 's home with a grenade launcher .
Winston , the owner of The Continental Hotel in New York City , reminds John that if he rejects the Marker , he will be violating one of the two unbreakable rules of the underworld : no blood on Continental grounds , and every Marker must be honored .
John accepts his commitment and meets with Santino , who tasks him with assassinating his sister Gianna , so he can claim her seat on the " High Table , " a council of high - level crime lords .
Santino sends Ares , his mute personal bodyguard , to surveil John .
In Rome , Italy , John infiltrates Gianna 's coronation party and confronts her .
Faced with certain death , Gianna chooses to take her own life by slitting her wrists .
As Gianna dies , John shoots her in the head to save her soul from damnation and , consequently , to fulfill his oath to the Marker .
Cassian , Gianna 's bodyguard , recognizes John and , after realizing that John was sent to kill Gianna , attacks him .
John escapes to the catacombs , where he is ambushed by Santino 's henchmen , who intend to " tie up loose ends " by killing him .
After killing most of the henchmen , John is pursued by Cassian .
Their battle is halted when they crash into the reception area of the Rome Continental , which — like the New York Continental — prohibits any " business " on its grounds .
As the two share a tense drink , Cassian vows revenge for Gianna 's death .
After John returns to New York City , Santino opens a $ 7 million contract for John 's death under the guise of avenging his sister , leading numerous assassins to unsuccessfully attack John .
Eventually , Cassian confronts John once again in the subway .
John wins the fight , but leaves Cassian alive out of professional respect .
Injured and desperate , John seeks help from an underground crime lord , the Bowery King , whose subordinates treat his injuries and guide him to Santino 's location .
John kills Santino 's bodyguards and defeats Ares in a knife fight , but Santino is able to escape to the Continental .
Santino smugly makes it clear that he intends to remain indefinitely in its sanctuary .
Despite Winston 's warnings , John shoots and kills Santino in the Continental lounge .
The next day , Winston sends for John and explains that , per the High Table , the contract on John has been doubled and offered globally .
As a consequence of killing Santino on Continental grounds , Winston declares John " excommunicado " from the Continental , losing all access and privileges to the Continental 's underworld resources .
However , Winston delays announcing John 's excommunication and global bounty by one hour to give him a head start , and provides him with a Marker for future use .
Before leaving , John advises Winston to make it known that whoever tries to come after him will be killed .
As John and his dog run through the park , dozens of cellphones around him ring , signaling that the global contract has been announced .
CAST * Keanu Reeves as Jonathan " John " Wick , a legendary ex - hitman
*
Riccardo Scamarcio as Santino D'Antonio , a camorra lord who forces Wick to perform an assassination
* Ian McShane as Winston , the owner and manager of the Continental Hotel in New York
* Ruby Rose as Ares , an assassin and Santino 's mute security enforcer
*
Common as Cassian , Gianna 's chief bodyguard * Claudia Gerini as Gianna D'Antonio , Santino 's sister * Lance Reddick as Charon , the concierge at the Continental Hotel in New York * Laurence Fishburne as The Bowery King , an underground crime
lord
* Tobias Segal as Earl , a homeless man who serves The Bowery King .
* John Leguizamo as Aurelio , the owner of a high - end chop shop * Bridget Moynahan as Helen Wick , John 's deceased wife * Thomas Sadoski as Jimmy , a police officer and friend of John 's * Erik Frandsen as Numismatic * David Patrick Kelly as Charlie ,
the cleaner * Perry Yung as Doctor * Franco Nero as Julius , the manager of the Continental Hotel in Rome
* Youma Diakite as Lucia
* Peter Serafinowicz as the Sommelier * Luca Mosca as Italian Tailor * Peter Stormare as Abram Tarasov , Viggo 's brother , Iosef 's uncle and a deskbound Russian gangster .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
In February 2015 , directors Chad Stahelski and David Leitch stated that a John Wick sequel had begun development .
In the same month , Jon Feltheimer , CEO of Lionsgate , stated during a conference call that " We see John Wick as a multiple - title action franchise " .
Additionally , it was reported that Kolstad would return to write the screenplay .
In May 2015 , it was confirmed that a sequel was greenlit , and Lionsgate would be selling the film at the Cannes Film Festival .
Reeves and Stahelski appeared in a 30-minute Aol.build interview in early February 2017 to discuss the development and casting of the film .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
It was announced that Keanu Reeves , Leitch , and Stahelski would return , with filming set to begin in late 2015 .
In October 2015 , Common joined the film to play the head of security for a female crime lord , and Ian McShane was confirmed to return as Winston , the owner of the Continental Hotel .
In November 2015 , Bridget Moynahan , John Leguizamo , Thomas Sadoski , and Lance Reddick were confirmed to return , while Ruby Rose , Riccardo Scamarcio , and Peter Stormare were added to the cast .
In December 2015 , it was announced that Laurence Fishburne would appear in a supporting role .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography on the film began on October 26 , 2015 , in New York City , New York , USA .
At the end of first week , filming had taken place in Manhattan , a New York City borough .
Filming moved to Rome , Italy next and later resumed in Montreal , Quebec , Canada on October 28 , 2015 .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
In April 2016 , it was announced that Tyler Bates and Joel J. Richard would return to write and compose the film 's soundtrack .
Along with the return of Le Castle Vania and Ciscandra Nostalghia , the soundtrack has also featured Alice in Chains ' guitarist and co - lead vocalist Jerry Cantrell in the song " A Job To Do " , whose lyrics were written by Cantrell from the perspective of Keanu Reeves ' character .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
John Wick :
Chapter 2 premiered at Arclight Hollywood in Los Angeles on January 30 , 2017 and was theatrically released in the United States on February 10 , 2017 by Summit Entertainment .
In the United Kingdom , the film was granted a 15 certificate by the British Board of Film Classification , after 23 seconds of a bloody injury within a suicide scene were removed to avoid an 18 rating .
The film opened in UK cinemas on February 17 , 2017 and was distributed by Warner Bros. , with co - production from Lionsgate studio Summit Entertainment .
Australia was one of the last major countries to receive the film , with a release on May 18 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
John Wick :
Chapter 2 grossed $ 92 million in the United States and Canada and $ 79.5 million in other territories for a worldwide gross of $ 171.5 million .
The film grossed $ 90.5 million worldwide in its first nine days of release , surpassing the entire theatrical gross of the first film ( $ 88.8 million ) .
In the United States and Canada , the film opened alongside two other sequels , The Lego Batman Movie and Fifty Shades Darker , and was projected to gross around $ 20 million in its opening weekend .
It earned $ 2.2 million from Thursday night previews at 2,400 theaters , an improvement over the $ 870,000 made by its predecessor .
It made $ 11 million on its first day , nearly totaling the $ 14.4 million the first film made in its entire opening weekend .
It went on to open to $ 30.4 million , more than double the opening weekend of the original film and finishing third at the box office behind The Lego Batman Movie ( $ 53 million ) and Fifty Shades Darker ( $ 46.6 million ) .
In its second weekend the film grossed $ 16.2 million ( a drop of 46.7 % ) , finishing 4th at the box office and making more in its second weekend than the original film made in its first .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 89 % based on 246 reviews and an average rating of 7.5/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads ,
" John Wick :
Chapter 2 does what a sequel should — which in this case means doubling down on the non - stop , thrillingly choreographed action that made its predecessor so much fun . "
On Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating , the film has a weighted average score of 75 out of 100 , based on 43 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A – " on an A+ to F scale , while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave it an 85 % overall positive score and a 72 % " definite recommend " .
Scott Tobias of Uproxx said the film improved upon the original , writing : "
For better or worse — though mostly for better — it 's a full - scale assault on the senses , constantly pushing itself to greater feats of excess .
At this rate , a third John Wick might trigger the apocalypse . "
Mike Rougeau of IGN gave the film an 8.5/10 , stating that it " takes joy in expanding on the original 's lore " , and praised the film as a vast improvement of its predecessor in terms of action set pieces , fight choreography , cinematography , and writing .
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone called it " the real deal " and " pure cinema " .
Writing for Time magazine in February Stephanie Zacharek stated : " The pleasures of John Wick :
Chapter 2 may be even greater than those of its predecessor — itself a symphonic achievement in scrappy , balls - out , action filmmaking — because in this one , there 's no puppy murder to endure ...
it 's lovers of humankind who are put to the test .
John Wick :
Chapter 2 asks the classic pulp question — Are human beings worth saving?—and delivers , with the right proportions of joy and sorrow , the classic pulp answer :
Sometimes , no . "
Both Richard Brody writing for The New Yorker and Stephen M. Colbert writing for screenrant.com
saw secret societies as a significant motif in the film .
In his article " The World of John Wick Explained " , Colbert stated : " John Wick introduced audiences to a dark , polished and sharply dressed , underground criminal society full of assassins who ( mostly ) abide by an unspoken code of conduct and two explicit rules .
While the first movie told a more intimate story that only hinted at the larger world of this secret society , John Wick :
Chapter Two takes the titular character through several of the corners of this complex underworld , revealing even more about the world of John Wick .
While very few of these customs are explicitly explained , there are still enough hints about the inner functionings of the various entities presented , giving us enough puzzle pieces to put together a loose sketch of this mysterious world of assassins . "
Ignatiy Vishnevetsky of The A.V. Club complained that it " lacks the first film 's domino - effect momentum .
" In part , he praised the action scenes as " entertainingly surreal " .
Jordan Hoffman of The Guardian called the film " a shameful example of Hollywood gun pornography " with a " hyperactive , blood - soaked , corpse - strewn video game aesthetic " but " only trace elements of a plot " and wondered " where the line of decency is as audience bloodlust continues to get chummed . " HOME RELEASE Section::::Home release .
The movie was released on DVD , Blu - ray and 4 K Ultra HD on June 13 , 2017 , from Summit Inc / Lionsgate .
SEQUEL
Section::::Sequel .
In October 2016 , Stahelski stated that a third film , titled John Wick 3 : Parabellum , is in the works and in June 2017 it was reported that Kolstad will return to write the screenplay .
In September 2017 , Lionsgate set the sequel 's release date for May 17 , 2019 .
In January 2018 , it was reported that Stahelski will return to direct with Hiroyuki Sanada in talks to join the cast .
In February 2018 , it was reported that in addition to Reeves , McShane , Rose , Common , Fishburne and Reddick would each reprise their roles from the film , with filming set to commence April 26 , 2018 , in New York City and Montreal .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS