JUMANJI :
WELCOME TO THE JUNGLE
Jumanji :
Welcome to the Jungle is a 2017 American fantasy action - adventure comedy film directed by Jake Kasdan and written by Chris McKenna , Erik Sommers , Scott Rosenberg , and Jeff Pinkner , based on a story by McKenna .
Part of the Jumanji franchise , the film is a sequel to the 1995 Jumanji , which was based on the 1981 children 's book of the same name by Chris Van Allsburg .
It pays tribute to Robin Williams , the star of the first film , by mentioning his character 's name .
In addition , a replica of the used by Williams 's character also appears as a clue for the Jumanji game 's new players .
The film stars Dwayne Johnson , Jack Black , Kevin Hart , Karen Gillan , Nick Jonas , and Bobby Cannavale .
Set twenty - one years after Jumanji , it follows four teenagers who are transported into the video game world of Jumanji and play as their chosen characters .
Joining another player , they must overcome the game 's magical power to win and return home .
Principal photography began in Honolulu in September 2016 and ended in Atlanta in December .
Jumanji :
Welcome to the Jungle premiered at the Grand Rex in Paris on December 5 , 2017 , and was theatrically released in the United States on December 20 in RealD 3D and IMAX , by Sony Pictures
Releasing under its Columbia Pictures label ; unlike its predecessor , which was distributed by Tristar Pictures .
The film received generally positive reviews from critics , who called it a " pleasant surprise " and praised the cast .
It grossed over $ 962million worldwide , becoming the fifth - highest - grossing film of 2017 and the 42nd - highest - grossing film of all time .
A sequel is scheduled to be released on December 13 , 2019 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1996 in Brantford , New Hampshire , teenager Alex Vreeke is given the Jumanji board game by his father , who found it on a beach .
Uninterested , he sets the game aside .
That night , it transforms into a video game cartridge which catches Alex 's attention when he is awakened by the Jumanji drum beats .
When he begins playing it , he disappears into the game .
Twenty years later , four students at Brantford High School are given detention :
Spencer Gilpin and his former friend Anthony " Fridge " Johnson for cheating , Bethany Walker for making a phone call during class , and Martha Kaply for talking back to her gym teacher .
In the school basement , where they are serving their detention , Fridge discovers Alex 's discarded video - game system , and he and Spencer decide to play .
Although it has five playable characters , they are unable to select the first one , so they choose two others , and convince the girls to play as the remaining two .
When Spencer presses " Start " , they are transported into the game .
They land in a jungle , in the forms of their game avatars .
Spencer is a tough , muscular explorer and archaeologist named Dr. Smolder Bravestone ; Fridge is a diminutive zoologist named Franklin " Mouse " Finbar ; Bethany is an overweight male cartographer named Professor Shelly Oberon ; and Martha is a female commando and martial arts expert named Ruby Roundhouse .
They each have three lives marked on their arms and Bethany immediately loses one after being eaten by a hippo .
Spencer deduces that if they lose all three , they die for real .
They learn the game 's story from NPC Nigel :
corrupt archeologist Russel Van Pelt stole the Jaguar 's Eye , a magic jewel , from its shrine , cursing Jumanji .
Nigel escaped Van Pelt with the jewel , and the players must return it to a jaguar statue and call " Jumanji " to lift the curse .
Nigel warns them that Van Pelt will stop at nothing to retrieve the jewel , which gives him control of Jumanji 's animals .
They begin tackling the game 's increasingly - difficult " levels " , losing lives as they do so .
The four are rescued by Alex , the missing fifth player , whose avatar is pilot Jefferson " Seaplane " McDonough .
Taking shelter in a jungle house built by the game 's previous player Alan Parrish , Alex believes that he has been in the game for a few months and is distressed to learn that it is really twenty years .
The newcomers vow to help him return home .
They break into a transportation shed , commandeering a helicopter to fly to the jaguar statue and return the jewel , but Fridge drops the jewel into a herd of white rhinoceros .
Spencer sacrifices one of Fridge 's lives , pushing him out of the helicopter as a distraction , and retrieves the jewel .
Alex loses his last life when a mosquito bites him , but Bethany performs CPR and transfers one of her lives to him .
At the statue , the players are surrounded by a pack of jaguars and Van Pelt 's forces .
They outmaneuver their opposition while Spencer and Martha race to the statue .
Van Pelt confronts Martha and demands the jewel , but she purposely gets a snake to bite her , allowing her to respawn and to get the jewel to Spencer .
With the players on their last lives , they end the game , with Van Pelt disintegrating into a bunch of rats , and return to the school basement , though without Alex .
They find the formerly - dilapidated Vreeke home restored and decorated for a Christmas family gathering .
An adult Alex arrives , having returned to 1996 when the game ended .
Now married with children , he reveals he named his eldest daughter after Bethany out of gratitude for saving his life .
Spencer and Fridge reconcile , Bethany begins caring for others more than herself and plans a summer wilderness backpacking adventure , Martha and Spencer become romantically involved and the four are now friends after their experiences in the game .
When they hear Jumanji 's drumbeats , they bring the game behind the school and Fridge destroys it to prevent anyone from playing it again .
CAST * Dwayne Johnson as Dr. Smolder Bravestone , Spencer 's avatar : a strong , confident archaeologist and explorer , and the leader of the team .
* Alex Wolff as Spencer Gilpin , a nerdy student at Brantford High School .
His experience as Smolder Bravestone helps him cope with his anxiety and panphobia and develop assertiveness .
* Jack Black as Professor Sheldon " Shelly " Oberon , Bethany 's avatar :
a cartographer , cryptographer , archaeologist , and paleontologist .
* Madison Iseman as Bethany Walker , a pretty , popular , self - centered teenage girl at Brantford High School
* Kevin Hart as Franklin " Mouse " Finbar ,
Fridge 's avatar : a diminutive zoologist and weapons specialist * Ser'Darius Blain as Anthony " Fridge " Johnson , a Brantford High School football jock coasting on his athletic prowess who cares more about dating than studying * Karen Gillan as Ruby Roundhouse , Martha 's avatar : a martial artist and dance fighter * Morgan Turner as Martha Kaply , a shy and cynical intellectual at Brantford High School * Nick Jonas as Jefferson " Seaplane " McDonough , Alex Vreeke 's avatar : a young aircraft pilot * Mason Guccione as Alex Vreeke , a teenage gamer who was trapped inside the Jumanji video game in 1996
* Colin Hanks as Alex as an adult two decades later
* Bobby Cannavale as Russel Van Pelt , Bravestone 's former partner and the game 's villain .
He tries to retrieve the Jaguar 's Eye , whose power possesses him .
* Rhys Darby as Nigel Billingsley , the players ' main in - game guide * Marc Evan Jackson as Principal Bentley , who makes Spencer , Bethany , Fridge , and Martha clean up the basement as part of their detention
* Carlease Burke as Miss Mathers , Spencer and Fridge 's history teacher * Sean Buxton as Mr. Vreeke , Alex 's father , who discovers the Jumanji game in 1996
*
Tim Matheson ( uncredited ) as Old Man Vreeke * Maribeth Monroe as Bethany 's English Teacher * Missi Pyle as Coach Webb , Martha , Spencer and Bethany 's gym teacher * Kat Altman as Lucinda , Bethany 's friend * Marin Hinkle as Mrs. Gilpin , Spencer 's mother * Tracey Bonner as Mrs. Johnson , Fridge 's mother
* Natasha Charles Parker as Mrs. Walker , Bethany 's mother * Michael Shacket as Fussfeld , a friend of Spencer 's at Brantford High School who is infatuated with Bethany * William Tokarsky as a food vendor in the game * Rohan Chand as a boy at a bazaar in the game
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
In July 2012 , rumors circulated that a remake of Jumanji was in development .
In an interview with The Hollywood Reporter ,
Columbia Pictures president Doug Belgrad said : " We 're going to try and reimagine Jumanji and update it for the present . "
On August 1 , 2012 , it was confirmed that Matthew Tolmach would produce the new version with William Teitler ( who produced the original film ) .
In August 2015 , Sony Pictures Entertainment announced that the film was scheduled for release on December 25 , 2016 .
Online reception to the news was negative , with some saying that the announcement came too soon after the August 2014 death of Robin Williams ( who played Alan Parrish in the original film ) .
The announcement was criticized by Bradley Pierce ( who played Peter Shepherd in Jumanji ) and by E ! News , which called the remake " unnecessary and kind of insulting " .
On October 23 , 2015 , Scott Rosenberg was hired to rewrite the script for the film , whose production was a high priority for the studio .
On January 14 , 2016 , Deadline Hollywood reported that Jake Kasdan had been hired to direct the film from a script by Rosenberg and Jeff Pinkner based on a draft by original writers Chris McKenna and Erik Sommers .
In March 2017 , during CinemaCon , it was announced that the film 's complete title was Jumanji : Welcome to the Jungle .
Its plot involved teenagers cleaning out a school 's basement who find a vintage video - game version of Jumanji and are sucked into the first film 's jungle setting .
Although fans debated whether the film was a sequel or a reboot , the second trailer ( released on September 20 , 2017 ) indicated that the sequel is set 21 years after the first .
Dwayne Johnson noted that the film was inspired by classic video games of the 1990s .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
On April 15 , Variety reported that Dwayne Johnson and Kevin Hart were in early talks to star in the film ( although both actors had other projects ) .
Later in the month , Johnson confirmed his casting on Instagram .
In July , it was reported that Nick Jonas had joined the film 's cast with Johnson , Hart , and Jack Black .
The following month , Johnson said that the film would not be a reboot but a continuation of the 1995 film ; Karen Gillan was announced as part of the cast .
On September 20 , Ser'Darius Blain was cast as Anthony " Fridge " Johnson and Madison Iseman as Bethany Walker .
Two days later , Rhys Darby was cast as Nigel Billingsley , Morgan Turner as Martha Kaply , and Alex Wolff as Spencer Gilpin .
In November 2016 , Bobby Cannavale announced his casting in the film , and in December 2016 , Tim Matheson joined the cast as Old Man Vreeke .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography began on September 19 , 2016 , in Honolulu , Hawaii , primarily at the Kualoa Ranch nature reserve .
The film wrapped on December 8 in Atlanta , Georgia .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
James Newton Howard was originally signed to compose the film 's score , he was replaced by Henry Jackman when the film 's release date was postponed six months .
The soundtrack was released digitally on 15 December 2017 by Sony Masterworks .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
In August 2015 , Sony gave the film a release date of December 25 , 2016 .
Since filming did not begin until September 2016 , the release was pushed back to July 28 and then to December 20 , 2017 .
On November 29 , 2017 , it was announced that Amazon Prime members in the United States would have early access to tickets for a December 8 screening of the film at select Regal , National Amusements , ArcLight Cinemas and AMC theaters .
The screenings sold out at 1,200 theaters and earned $ 1.9 million .
The film was released on IMAX 2D on January 12 , 2018 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Jumanji :
Welcome to the Jungle was released on Digital HD on March 6 , 2018 , and on DVD , Blu - ray , and 4 K Ultra HD Blu - ray on March 20 , although the film was still in theaters .
The Blu - ray and digital versions include two additional featurettes : " Surviving the Jungle : Spectacular Stunts ! "
and " Book to Board Game to Big Screen & Beyond !
Celebrating The Legacy of Jumanji " .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Jumanji :
Welcome to the Jungle grossed $ 404.5 million in the United States and Canada and $ 557.6 million in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 962.1 million .
On April 10 , 2018 , the film passed Spider - Man ( $ 403.7 million ) to become Sony 's highest - grossing film domestically .
Deadline Hollywood calculated its net profit as $ 305.7 million when factoring all expenses and revenues , making it 2017 's fourth - most - profitable release .
In the U.S. and Canada , the film was released on December 20 , 2017 , with The Greatest Showman and was projected to gross about $ 60 million from 3,765 theaters in its six - day opening weekend ; the studio predicted a $ 45 million debut .
It earned $ 7.2 million on its first day and $ 7.6 million on its second day .
Over the three - day weekend , the film grossed $ 36.2 million ( for a six - day total of $ 71.9 million ) , finishing second at the box office behind .
Its weekend - only earnings increased to $ 50.1 million during its second weekend , again finishing in second place at the box office .
The 38.4 percent weekend - to - weekend increase was the fourth - largest for a film playing in over 3,000 theaters ; The Greatest Showman set the record for best hold the same weekend .
The film passed Star Wars : The Last Jedi for the top spot the following weekend , declining 28.1 percent to $ 36 million , and finished first again the following week with $ 28.1 million ( and a total of $ 35.2 million over the four - day MLK weekend ) .
Jumanji :
Welcome to the Jungle remained atop the box office for its third weekend , earning $ 19.5 million .
It again topped the box office for a fourth consecutive week ( its sixth week overall in theatres ) with $ 19.5 million , topping new releases 12 Strong and Den of Thieves .
The film continued to do well the following week , dropping 16 percent ( to $ 16.1 million ) and finishing second to , before regaining the top spot for a fifth time the following weekend with $ 10.9 million .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 77 % based on 209 reviews , and an average rating of 6.2/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , "
Jumanji :
Welcome to the Jungle uses a charming cast and a humorous twist to offer an undemanding yet solidly entertaining update on its source material .
"
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 58 out of 100 , based on 44 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A− " on an A+ to F scale , while those at PostTrak gave it an 84 % positive score .
Dave White of TheWrap praised the cast and called the film a pleasant surprise :
" Jumanji :
Welcome to The Jungle is the Christmas tentpole release that aims to please and succeeds , a funny family entertainment product that subverts more expectations than it was obligated to contractually " .
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone writes " enough star power and comic zest to deliver a fun time at the movies [ ... ] barely " and praises the cast , particularly Jack Black as hilarious and for finding the " vulnerable heart " of the character .
Travers gives the film 2.5 stars out of 4 .
Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian newspaper gives the film 3 out of 5 stars .
Bradshaw praises Johnson for his " endearing performance " and calls it an " amiable effort " expects that will go down well on home viewings .
David Ehrlich of IndieWire gave the film a C grade , calling it unnecessary but mildly amusing :
" Jumanji :
Welcome to the Jungle is further proof that even the stalest whiff of brand recognition has become preferable to originality .
Only part of the blame for that belongs to the studios but after cannibalizing themselves for much of the last 20 years , Hollywood has clearly eaten their way down to the crumbs " .
For Variety , Owen Gleiberman wrote : " Excitement !
Suspense !
Childlike innocence !
Ingeniously staged action set pieces !
These are a few of the things you will not find , anywhere , in Jumanji :
Welcome to the Jungle ...
It 's supposed to be a board game come to life but really , it 's just a bored game . "
ACCOLADES SEQUEL Section::::Sequel .
Dwayne Johnson , Jack Black , and Nick Jonas discussed Jumanji 3 plot in interviews , including the possibility of the film exploring the origins of the game .
According to Karen Gillan , the alternate ending of Jumanji : Welcome to the Jungle would have left the door open for another installment .
In February 2018 , it was announced that Kasdan would direct the sequel , with Rosenberg and Pinkner again writing the script and Johnson , Hart , Black , Gillan and Jonas reprising their roles .
Filming will begin in January 2019 .
The film is slated to be released December 13 , 2019 .
According to Kevin Hart , the sequel will have the main four stars , Dwayne Johnson , Karen Gillan , Jack Black , Nick Jonas , and himself , back .
The cast and crew will start shooting for the sequel by the end of January 2019 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official site – Sony Pictures