DOLLY PARTON 'S COAT OF MANY COLORS Dolly Parton 's Coat of Many Colors is a 2015 American made - for - television drama film based on a true story by Dolly Parton , written by Pamela K. Long and directed by Stephen Herek .
The film premiered on NBC on December 10 , 2015 .
The film received generally positive reviews from critics .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Coat of Many Colors details Dolly Parton 's upbringing in 1955 as her family struggles to live in Tennessee 's Great Smoky Mountains , putting a strain on love and faith .
Dolly ( Alyvia Alyn Lind ) aspires to be something greater but must cope with family troubles , including the premature birth and death of a baby brother .
Dolly 's mother , Avie Lee Parton ( Jennifer Nettles ) uses the baby 's blanket to make Dolly her patchwork coat of many colors .
Although Dolly is at first proud of it , she changes her mind after school bullies make fun of her .
Meanwhile , Dolly 's father , Lee Parton ( Ricky Schroder ) suffers a personal crisis brought about by the baby 's death combined with the depression of his wife and a drought which threatened his tobacco crop .
Eventually , faith brings the family together again .
CAST * Alyvia Alyn Lind as Dolly Parton , a precocious nine - year - old who hopes to be a famous singer * Jennifer Nettles as Avie Lee Parton , the devout matriarch of the Partons living in the mountains * Ricky Schroder as Robert Lee Parton , the hard - working patriarch of the Partons with faith issues * Gerald McRaney as Rev. Jake Owens , Avie Lee 's father and preacher
* Carson Meyer as Willadeene Parton , Dolly 's oldest sister * Hannah Nordberg as Judy Ogle , Dolly 's schoolmate - turned - friend * Mary Lane Haskell as Miss Moody , school teacher who is firm yet supportive of Dolly 's aspiration * Stella Parton as Corla Bass , owner of the town market and a gossip * Forrest Deal as Rudy Sanders ,
a school bully
* Kennedy Brice as Gloria Sanders , Rudy 's sister and another bully
* Farrah Mackenzie as Stella Parton , Dolly 's younger sister * Parker Sack as David Parton , Dolly 's oldest brother * Dylan Rowen as Denver Parton , Dolly 's second - oldest brother * Blane Crockarell as Bobby Parton , Dolly 's younger brother
* Jennifer D. Taylor as Aunt Dorothy Jo
* Dolly Parton as the narrator PRODUCTION FILMING
Section::::Production .
Section::::Filming .
Coat of Many Colors was filmed in Covington and Conyers , Georgia , and Sevier County , Tennessee , the latter at Dollywood for introductory and closing scenes from Dolly Parton .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Parton , whose childhood is told in the film 's story written by her , is also executive producer .
She spoke about the casting process , beginning with singer Jennifer Nettles , who plays her mother : " When she started reading I thought , Oh my lord , that 's momma .
And , she is incredible ...
I did n't even know she acted .
" For her father , Parton already had someone in mind , Ricky Schroder , because " he reminds me so much of my daddy . "
In casting the younger Dolly , several hundred children auditioned .
Parton stated " God 's going to send her . "
Alyvia Alyn Lind auditioned and could " sing ... act " and " cry on cue " , said Parton , adding , " When she came in , it just kind of blew it all out of the water and she got the part . "
In addition , Dolly 's younger sister Stella Parton appears in the film , playing town gossip Corla Bass .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
Coat of Many Colors received favorable reviews from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes , it has received a 78 % rating from nine critics .
Among eight reviews at Metacritic , it holds a " generally favorable " score of 65 out of 100 .
Ken Tucker of Yahoo TV gave the film its highest praise , stating " The pastoral nostalgia that this TV - movie taps into is powerful , if maudlin , stuff .
This is the time of year when sentimentality can be a warming thing , and Parton 's Coat will keep an awful lot of people warm this winter . "
The Guardian Brian Moylan commented on the film 's faith storyline : " For those who do n't regularly visit the house of the Lord , it will make your eyes roll like loose marbles in the back of a station wagon . "
David Wiegand of the San Francisco Chronicle was the most critical but commented : "
Although it 's a struggle at times , you do suspend disbelief and go with it because Lind is so adorable , and you want to accept that the saccharine story line could have played out in real life just the way it 's depicted in the film . "
RATINGS Section::::Ratings .
In its initial December 10 , 2015 broadcast , Coat of Many Colors was seen by 13.03 million viewers and received a 1.8/6 rating / share in the 18 - 49 age demographic .
This marks the highest viewership for any television film ( made for TV or theatrical ) or miniseries on the broadcast networks since 2012 .
AWARDS Section::::Awards .
On April 3 , 2016 , Coat of Many Colors was honored during the Academy of Country Music Awards ceremony with the Tex Ritter Award , which is presented to a film released in the previous year that features country music .
Dolly Parton accepted the award .
SEQUEL
Section::::Sequel .
In May 2016 , it was announced that a sequel to the film is in the works .
In , Jennifer Nettles , Ricky Schroder , Gerald McRaney and Alyvia Alyn Lind reprised their roles .
Stephen Herek returned to direct the sequel written by Pamela K. Long .
Dolly Parton herself also had a cameo .
The film aired on NBC on November 30 , 2016 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS