LOVE YOURSELF
" Love Yourself " is a song recorded by Canadian singer Justin Bieber for his fourth studio album Purpose ( 2015 ) .
The song was released first as a promotional single on November 8 , 2015 , and later was released as the album 's third single .
It was written by Ed Sheeran , Benny Blanco and Bieber , and produced by Blanco .
An acoustic pop song , " Love Yourself " features an electric guitar and a brief flurry of trumpets as its main instrumentation .
During the song , Bieber uses a husky tone in the lower registers .
Lyrically , the song is a kiss - off to a narcissistic ex - lover who did the protagonist wrong .
On the US Billboard Hot 100 and the UK Singles Chart , the song became Bieber 's third consecutive number - one , where in the United States it spent 24 non - consecutive weeks in the top ten ( later named the best - performing single of 2016 ) and was also Bieber 's first number one on the Adult Contemporary chart , while in the United Kingdom it spent six weeks at the top . "
Love Yourself " topped the charts in fifteen countries , including Australia , Canada , New Zealand , and Sweden . "
Love Yourself " was nominated for two Grammy Awards : Song of the Year and Best Pop Solo Performance .
It was the seventh - best - selling song of 2016 in the US .
The music video for the song was released along with the Purpose :
The Movement project on November 14 , 2015 .
It features a couple doing an interpretive dance in their house .
Bieber promoted the song with performances on TV shows , as well as awards shows throughout 2015–16 , while adding it on the set list of his Purpose World Tour .
BACKGROUND AND RELEASE Section::::Background and release .
On September 29 , 2015 , Justin Bieber announced in an interview with Australia 's Sunrise morning show that British singer and songwriter Ed Sheeran had written a song for his then - upcoming album .
Later , during an interview for Capital FM , Bieber revealed details about the song , saying : " It 's just me and a guitar .
Basically that 's how I started , playing on the street with a guitar . "
About Sheeran , he said : " I think he 's one of the most talented writers in the game right now , so just to have his input and his stories and our stories and match them up together and say ' What have you been through ? , ' and telling the same story . "
In another interview for the same radio network , he commented about the collaboration , stating : " It was a process .
Just getting us together , you know , in the same room cause we did a lot of it separate .
He is a good guy , super talented .
Really good songwriter so just to be able to work with that calibre of songwriter was really , really awesome . "
In 2017 , Sheeran revealed that " Love Yourself " was written for his album ÷.
He said in an interview that the track would have been scrapped before Bieber took the song .
On November 9 , 2015 " Love Yourself " premiered on Beats 1 along with " The Feeling " .
The song was also made available on iTunes in the same day as a promotional single of Purpose , and later it was announced as the album 's official third radio single .
When talking to Ryan Seacrest , Bieber said " Love Yourself " is " definitely about someone in my past , someone who I do n't want to put on blast , " he described the song as " cool because so many people can resonate with that because how many women do we bring back that mom does n't really necessarily like ? .
" COMPOSITION AND LYRICS Section::::Composition and lyrics .
" Love Yourself " was written by Ed Sheeran , Benny Blanco and Justin Bieber , with production being done by Benny Blanco , who was also responsible for the song 's instrumentation and programming .
It features background vocals by Sheeran .
According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , the song is composed in the key of E major with a moderate tempo of 100 beats per minute and a time signature of .
Bieber 's vocals range from the note of B to B.
It is an acoustic pop song , featuring just vocals , an electric guitar , and a brief flurry of trumpets , which was considered " the most subdued and least electronic of Bieber 's new tracks . "
Lyrically , " Love Yourself " is a kiss - off to a narcissistic ex - lover who did the protagonist wrong , with Bieber singing in a snappy and spiteful tone while " hating on a girl for loving herself too much .
" In the pre - chorus , he sings with a husky tone in the lower registers : " My mama do n't like you , and she likes everyone , " " in a style that molds well to Sheeran 's , " according to Rolling Stone Brittany Spanos . "
And I [ never ] like to admit that I was wrong .
And I 've been so caught up in my job , did n't see what 's going on , and now I know ,
I 'm better sleeping on my own , " he continues .
In the chorus , Bieber sings , " Cause if you like the way you look that much , oh baby you should go and love yourself , " which according to Digital Spy 's Amy Davidson , " ' love yourself ' means ' go f**k yourself ' in this context .
"
On March 7 , 2017 , composer Ed Sheeran stated on the Howard Stern Show that he had Rihanna in mind for the song at first , and the original lyric was indeed " fuck yourself " .
In the song 's bridge , Bieber uses a " brass - and - vocalese " style .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Andrew Unterberger of Spin called it " an earth - salting , cruelly chuckling kiss - off track , it features an unprecedented - for - Bieber caliber of lyrical detail , and its minimal arrangement allows every lyrical barb to pop like one of the song 's palm - mutes .
For such sour grapes , though , ' Love Yourself ' still sounds exultant ; one of many reminders this year that for all his insistence on being a good person , Bieber may ultimately be best served as a Top 40 heel . "
Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly complimented the track as one of her favourites from the album , naming it " the world 's first campfire - folk diss track . "
Amy Davidson of Digital Spy agreed , calling it a ' deliciously evil poison - pen ballad ' .
Sheldon Pearce of Complex praised " Sorry " and " Love Yourself " for " display[ing ] the best of Bieber in tandem : the full scope of his pop stylings — blue - eyed soul fleshing out both electronic and acoustic spaces . "
Kenneth Partridge of Billboard wrote that Bieber " overplay[s ] his renewed spirituality ...
mak[ing ]
like John Mayer doing Sam Smith , " citing the track as an example .
Josh Gonzalez of Music Times thought the song was " a cool change of pace and nod musically to his 2014 duet with Cody Simpson ' Home to Mama ' , " adding : " Bieber is a great vocalist and does well on acoustic tracks . "
For Consequence of Sound editor Janine Schaults , " all the credit goes to Sheeran 's cherubic magic powers .
Refreshingly , just a guitar and a lonely trumpet interlude accompany Bieber 's coy delivery . "
Michelles Geslani of the same publication opined that the track " sounds exactly what you 'd expect from a meeting of these two minds , " considering it " ' Thinking Out Loud ' crossed with low - key , lovelorn Bieber . "
Kitty Empire , writing for The Observer , appreciated the song for " strip[ping ] everything back very effectively to a guitar line and a vocal . "
Annie Zaleski of The A.V. Club was mixed , noting that " despite being a nicely deadpan kiss - off to a snobby ex , is generic acoustic - pop . "
In a less favorable review , Pitchfork 's Brad Nelson wrote that , lyrically , " it 's needlessly mean , neither funny nor clever , and it does n't do much to justify the severity of its perspective .
"
Al Horner of NME noted that the song is " more traditionally Bieber , and [ its ] big pop hook [ is ] out of place amidst the forward - thinking electronic scuttle . "
Sam C. Mac of Slant Magazine called the lyrics " unintentionally hilarious . "
Alex Macpherson of The National called it " a cloying Ed Sheeran collaboration .
" Billboard ranked " Love Yourself " at number 34 on their " 100 Best Pop Songs of 2016 " list .
CHART PERFORMANCE
UNITED STATES Section::::Chart performance .
Section::::United States .
In the United States , the song debuted at number four on the Billboard Hot 100 , giving Bieber his ninth top ten song and his third consecutive top ten debut from Purpose .
It also debuted at number two and four on the Digital Songs and Streaming Songs charts , respectively , with 141,000 downloads and 17.4 million streams .
The following week , it descended to number seven on the Hot 100 .
Two weeks later , it ascended from seven to five on the Hot 100 , meanwhile
Bieber 's " Sorry " and " What Do You Mean ? " were at number two and four , respectively .
Thus , as he did three weeks prior when " Love Yourself " debuted at number four , Bieber had three concurrent songs in the Hot 100 's top five , becoming the third act to achieve it since 50 Cent in 2005 .
Bieber and The Beatles are the only acts to earn the honor as a lead artist on all three songs .
On the chart dated February 6 , 2016 , " Love Yourself " ascended from three to two on the Hot 100 , meanwhile Bieber 's " Sorry " was at number one .
With the feat , Bieber became the 17th act in the Hot 100 's history to rank at numbers one and 2 simultaneously .
He was also the 11th act to hold the Hot 100 's top two as a lead artist on both songs .
The following week , " Love Yourself " replaced " Sorry " at number one , becoming his third consecutive number - one single .
Thus , Bieber was the 12th artist to succeed himself in the Hot 100 's 57-year history ; the last artist before Bieber was The Weeknd , who is also from Canada .
Additionally , Bieber 's Purpose became the first album by a male artist to produce three number - one songs since Justin Timberlake 's FutureSex / LoveSounds did so in 2006–07 .
After being replaced at the top of the Hot 100 by Zayn 's debut single as a solo artist , " Pillowtalk " , for one week , it returned to the number one position the following date .
Also , " Love Yourself " replaced " Sorry " at the top of the Radio Songs chart with 144 million weekly audience , becoming Bieber 's second number - one song on the chart .
However , the next week , " Love Yourself " was replaced at the top by Rihanna 's " Work " and descended to number two .
By the middle of 2016 , the song had sold 1.6 million copies in the U.S.
On the chart dated 7 May 2016 , " Love Yourself " spent its 23rd consecutive week in the Hot 100 's top ten , breaking the record for the most consecutive weeks logged in the top 10 from a song 's debut , previously set by Nicki Minaj 's " Starships " , Maroon 5 's " Sugar " and Bieber 's both " What Do You Mean ? " and " Sorry " .
It has since been passed by The Chainsmokers 's " Closer " ( 2016–2017 ) , which spent 32 weeks in the top 10 .
Additionally , the song spent an eleventh week at the top of the Radio Songs chart .
Additionally , on the chart dated 14 May 2016 , " Love Yourself " became Bieber 's first chart - topper on the Adult Contemporary chart .
The song was the most - played song in the United States in 2016 , with nearly 4 billion audience impressions .
During 2016 , " Love Yourself " sold 1.8 million copies in the US , thus being listed seventh on the best - selling songs of the year list .
Overall , it has sold 2.7 million copies in the country .
" Love Yourself " finished at No . 1 on the Billboard Hot 100 Year - End of 2016 released in December 2016 , becoming Bieber 's highest charting song on Hot 100 Year - End to date , surpassing " Boyfriend " on the Hot 100 Year - End of 2012 .
This made him the youngest artist to date to receive a No . 1 single on a Hot 100 Year - End chart in Billboard 's history .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
In the United Kingdom , " Love Yourself " debuted at number three on the UK Singles Chart on 19 November 2015 , after the release of Purpose .
The following week , it rose to number two before replacing " Sorry " at the top of the chart on 4 December 2015 .
Bieber is the first artist to replace themselves at the chart 's summit since Elvis Presley in 2005 .
"
Love Yourself " marked Bieber 's third consecutive chart - topping song in Britain .
The following week , the song stayed at the top of the chart with 114,000 combined sales and " Sorry " stayed at number two , which made Bieber the first artist ever to knock himself off the top spot with both songs holding at one and 2 for two consecutive weeks . "
Love Yourself " and " Sorry " remained at the same place the next week , which made Bieber the first artist ever to log four weeks at numbers one and 2 consecutively , breaking the record previously held by The Beatles , who logged three consecutive weeks at numbers one and 2 in 1967–68 .
" Love Yourself " was beaten to the top by NHS Choir 's " A Bridge Over You " charity single by nearly 31,000 chart sales .
However , the single rose to the number - one spot the next week , logging a fourth week at the summit and claiming the first number - one song of 2016 .
The following week , it remained at number one , making Bieber the first artist on the UK
Singles Chart to occupy the top three spots on the chart at the same time with " Sorry " at number two and " What Do You Mean ?
" climbing one place to three .
"
Love Yourself " spent six non - consecutive weeks at number one .
On 4 January 2016 , the Official Charts Company announced that ' Love Yourself ' has earned 719,000 combined sales .
AUSTRALIA Section::::Australia .
In Australia , " Love Yourself " debuted at number three on the ARIA Singles Chart , after the release of Purpose , giving Bieber his fifth top - three single in the country .
That week the singer had three songs inside the top ten :
" Sorry " ( 2 ) , " Love Yourself " ( 3 ) and " What Do You Mean ? "
( 7 ) .
Two weeks later , " Love Yourself " was the most streamed track in the country and rose to number two , also it earned a gold certification for sales of over 35,000 copies .
In its fourth week , the song ascended from two to one , dethroning Adele 's " Hello " and earning a platinum certification for sales of over 70,000 copies .
With that , Bieber became the only act to have two number - one songs in 2015 following
previous single " What Do You Mean ?
" , which topped the chart during four consecutive weeks in September .
The song stayed at the top of the chart the following two weeks .
On its third week at number one , Bieber 's ' Sorry ' and " What Do You Mean ? " were at number two and eight , respectively .
With that , Bieber became the first act to dominate the top two positions since Macklemore & Ryan Lewis did in 2013 with " Same Love " and " Thrift Shop " .
He also was the first act to have three singles inside the chart 's top ten since 2012 .
The song was the first number - one song of 2016 and has spent seven consecutive weeks at number one , which places Bieber at number 8 on the list for the most accumulated weeks ( 11 ) at number one in the 2010s .
Also , it is his longest - running number - one single in Australia . "
Love Yourself " also topped the charts in Sweden , Ireland , New Zealand , Netherlands and Denmark .
MUSIC VIDEO PURPOSE : THE MOVEMENT Section::::Music video .
Section::::Purpose : The Movement .
The song 's music video was released on YouTube on November 14 , 2015 along with the other videos from " Purpose : The Movement " .
The video starts with Bieber saying : " Love is n't ' do this for me
and I 'm going to do this for you . '
That 's not what love is .
Love is just ' I 'm gon na do this for you because I wanna do this for you . ' "
Later , the video features husband and wife dancers Keone and Mari Madrid dancing their way through their house .
They are later seen dancing on their phone screens .
The video ends when the wife wakes up and finds a note on her husband 's pillow saying , " Love Yourself " .
As of November 2018 , the music video has received over 1.4 billion views on YouTube .
LIVE PERFORMANCES AND COVERS Section::::Live performances and covers .
Bieber first performed " Love Yourself " on The Ellen DeGeneres Show during ' Purpose ' week release .
On November 18 , 2015 , the song was also performed on The Today Show along with other tracks from the album .
Bieber also added the song to the set list of his show on Capital FM 's Jingle Bell Ball 2015 .
He performed the song at the 58th Annual Grammy Awards .
The singer performed an acoustic version of the track with James Bay on the guitar before performing " Sorry " during the 2016 Brit Awards .
He also performed an acoustic version of the song during the 3rd iHeartRadio Music Awards before proceeding to a full performance of " Company " .
" Love Yourself " is also part of the set list of his Purpose World Tour .
The performance has Bieber on acoustic guitar while seated on a red velvet couch down center stage .
He performed the song at Radio Disney Music Awards during a special pocket show for fans , previously recorded .
On June 4 , 2017 , Bieber performed " Love Yourself " at the One Love Manchester benefit concert for the victims of the 2017 Manchester Arena bombing .
Canadian singer Alessia Cara posted a video covering of the song on her YouTube channel on November 14 , 2015 .
English singer Conor Maynard also posted a video covering the song on his YouTube channel on November 17 , 2015 .
American singer Halsey also performed a cover version for Triple J 's Like a Version studio in Australia on February 4 , 2016 .
Her version garnered attention since she replaced " love yourself " with " fuck yourself .
" British singers Yo Preston and Kelly Kiara teamed up to write a reply to the song , with the version being called " Love Yourself vs F*ck Yourself .
" In their version , Kiara responds to Bieber 's lyrics taking about the boy 's cheating habits and overwhelming jealousy .
Their version charted on the ARIA Charts , reaching the top - twenty , peaking at number 16 .
The song was also covered by American pop punk band Grayscale for Punk Goes
Pop Vol .
7 , a compilation album of covers , which was released by Fearless Records on July 14 , 2017 .
CREDITS AND PERSONNEL Section::::Credits and personnel .
Recording
* Recorded at Record Plant , Los Angeles
* Mixed at Henson Recording Studios Personnel
* Ed Sheeran – co - writing , backing vocals
* Benny Blanco – writing , production , instrumentation , programming .
* Justin Bieber – writing , vocals .
* Philip Beaudreau – trumpet .
* Chris " Anger Management " Sclafani – engineering .
* Simon Cohen – engineering .
* Josh Gudwin – engineering , mixing .
* Chris " Tek " O'Ryan – additional engineering .
* Henrique Andrade – additional engineering .
* Derrick Stockwell – mixing assistant .
* Andrew " McMuffin " Luftman – production coordinator .
* Seif " Mageef " Hussain – production coordinator .
Credits adapted from the liner notes of Purpose , Def Jam Recordings .
CHARTS WEEKLY CHARTS
Section::::Charts .
Section::::Weekly charts . !
Chart ( 2015–16 ) !
Peakposition !
scope="row " Argentina ( Monitor Latino ) ! scope="row " Ecuador ( National - Report ) !
scope="row"Iceland ( RÚV ) !
scope="row " Lebanon ( Lebanese Top 20 ) ! scope="row " Portugal ( AFP ) !
scope="row
" !
scope="row"Slovenia ( SloTop50 ) !
scope="row"South
Korea Chart ( Gaon ) YEAR - END CHARTS Section::::Year - end charts .
!
scope="col " Chart ( 2015 ) ! scope="col " Position !
scope="row " Australia ( ARIA ) ! scope="row " Germany ( Official German Charts ) ! scope="row " UK Singles ( Official Charts Company ) ! scope="col " Chart ( 2016 ) ! scope="col " Position !
scope="row " Argentina ( Monitor Latino ) ! scope="row " Australia ( ARIA ) !
scope="row
" Austria ( Ö3 Austria Top 40 ) ! scope="row " Belgium ( Ultratop Flanders ) ! scope="row " Belgium ( Ultratop Wallonia ) ! scope="row " Brazil ( Brasil Hot 100 ) ! scope="row
" Canada ( Canadian Hot 100 ) ! scope="row " Denmark ( Tracklisten ) ! scope="row " France ! scope="row " Germany ( Official German Charts ) ! scope="row " Israel ( Media Forest ) ! scope="row " Italy ( FIMI ) ! scope="row " Netherlands ( Single Top 100 ) ! scope="row " New Zealand ( Recorded Music NZ ) ! scope="row " Poland ( ZPAV ) !
scope="row
" Slovenia ( SloTop50 ) ! scope="row " Spain ( PROMUSICAE ) ! scope="row " Sweden ( Sverigetopplistan ) ! scope="row " Switzerland ( Schweizer Hitparade ) ! scope="row
" UK Singles ( Official Charts Company ) ! scope="row " US Billboard Hot 100 ! scope="row " US Adult Contemporary ( Billboard ) ! scope="row " US Adult Top 40
( Billboard ) !
scope="row " US Mainstream Top 40
( Billboard )
CERTIFICATIONS
RELEASE HISTORY Section::::Release history .
!
scope="col"Country !
scope="col"Date !
scope="col"Format !
scope="col"Label ! scope="col
" ! scope="row " Various ! scope="row " Italy SEE ALSO * List of Billboard Hot 100 number - one singles of 2016
* List of number - one singles of 2015
( Australia ) * List of number - one singles of 2016
( Australia ) * List of Canadian Hot 100 number - one singles of 2016
* List of number - one singles of 2016 ( South Africa )
* List of number - one international songs of 2016 ( South Korea )
* List of UK Singles Chart number ones of the 2010s
* Billboard Year - End Hot 100 singles of 2016 REFERENCES