HURRICANE PATRICIA Hurricane Patricia was the second - most intense tropical cyclone on record worldwide , behind Typhoon Tip in 1979 , with a minimum atmospheric pressure of 872 mbar ( hPa ; 25.75 inHg ) .
Originating from a sprawling disturbance near the Gulf of Tehuantepec , south of Mexico , in mid - October 2015 , Patricia was first classified a tropical depression on October 20 .
Initial development was slow , with only modest strengthening within the first day of its classification .
The system later became a tropical storm and was named Patricia , the twenty - fourth named storm of the annual hurricane season .
Exceptionally favorable environmental conditions fueled explosive intensification on October 22 .
A well - defined eye developed within an intense central dense overcast and Patricia grew from a tropical storm to a Category 5 hurricane in just 24 hours — a near - record pace .
On October 23 , the hurricane achieved its record peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 215 mph ( 345 km / h ) .
This made it the most intense tropical cyclone on record in the Western Hemisphere , and the strongest globally in terms of 1-minute maximum sustained winds .
Late on October 23 , dramatic weakening ensued and Patricia made landfall near Cuixmala , Jalisco , with winds of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) .
This made it the strongest landfalling hurricane on record along the Pacific coast of Mexico .
Patricia continued to weaken extremely quickly , faster than it had intensified , as it interacted with the mountainous terrain of Mexico .
Within 24 hours of moving ashore , Patricia weakened into a tropical depression and dissipated soon thereafter , late on October 24 .
The precursor to Patricia produced widespread flooding rains in Central America .
Hundreds of thousands of people were directly affected by the storm , mostly in Guatemala .
At least six fatalities were attributed to the event : four in El Salvador , one in Guatemala , and one in Nicaragua .
Torrential rains extended into southeastern Mexico , with areas of Quintana Roo and Veracruz reporting accumulations in excess of .
Damage in Chetumal reached 1.4 billion pesos ( US$ 84.1 million ) .
As a tropical cyclone , Patricia 's effects in Mexico were tremendous ; however , the affected areas were predominantly rural , mitigating a potential large - scale disaster .
Violent winds tore roofs from structures and stripped coastal areas of their vegetation .
Preliminary assessments indicated hundreds of homes to be destroyed ; seven fatalities were linked to the hurricane directly or indirectly , including one during evacuations .
Total damage was estimated to be in excess of 5.4 billion pesos ( US$ 323.3 million ) , with agriculture and infrastructure comprising the majority of losses .
Flooding partially associated with remnant moisture from Patricia inflicted US$ 52.5 million in damage across Southern Texas .
METEOROLOGICAL HISTORY Section::::Meteorological history .
On October 11 , 2015 , an area of disturbed weather traversed Central America and emerged over the eastern Pacific Ocean .
The disturbance moved slowly over the next few days , later merging with a tropical wave on October 15 .
The merger of these systems and the effects of a concurrent Tehuantepec gap wind event spurred the formation of a broad area of low pressure .
This feature gradually consolidated and became a tropical depression shortly after 00:00 UTC on October 20 ; at this time the depression was situated roughly 205 mi ( 335 km ) south - southeast of Salina Cruz , Mexico .
A mid - level ridge to the north steered the depression generally west and later pulled it north along an arcing path .
Development was initially slowed by locally cooler sea surface temperatures and dry air , and the depression became Tropical Storm Patricia later that day .
Once clear of the unfavorable region , Patricia traversed anomalously warm waters within an environment exceptionally conducive to rapid intensification .
Dramatic strengthening began late on October 21 and continued through October 23 .
Patricia reached hurricane strength shortly after 00:00 UTC on October 22 , featuring prominent outflow , well - defined banding features , and a developing eye .
Data from Hurricane Hunters investigating the cyclone indicated Patricia to have reached Category 4 status on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale by 18:00 UTC .
By the early hours of October 23 , a clear northward turn took place followed by acceleration northeast .
A solid ring of cloud tops surrounded the hurricane 's wide eye and signaled its intensification into a Category 5 hurricane .
In a 24-hour time span , Patricia 's maximum sustained winds increased by 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) , the fastest such intensification in any hurricane observed by the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) .
The hurricane achieved its peak around 12:00 UTC on October 23 , with estimated winds around 215 mph ( 345 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 872 mbar ( hPa ; 25.75 inHg ) ; these values are based upon continued intensification after a Hurricane Hunter mission into the storm six hours prior .
In the NHC 's report on Patricia , it is noted that the hurricane may have surpassed Typhoon Tip as the strongest tropical cyclone ever observed , but lack of direct observations at the time of its peak prevent analysis of such .
Later on October 23 , rapid weakening ensued as an eyewall replacement cycle took shape and wind shear increased .
In the five hours up until landfall in Mexico , Patricia weakened at an unprecedented rate while still over water .
However , it remained a violent hurricane and moved ashore around 23:00 UTC near Cuixmala , Jalisco , a strong Category 4 hurricane , with sustained winds of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) and an analyzed pressure of 932 mbar ( hPa ; 27.49 inHg ) .
This made Patricia the most intense Pacific hurricane on record to strike Mexico .
Once onshore , the high terrain of the Sierra Madre mountains accelerated Patricia 's weakening .
The low- and mid - level circulations of the tropical cyclone decoupled , with the latter accelerating northeast , and Patricia dissipated on October 24 over central Mexico , less than 18 hours after moving ashore .
RECORDS Section::::Records .
Hurricane Patricia set multiple records for maximum strength , rate of intensification , and rate of weakening throughout its relatively short existence .
With maximum sustained winds of 215 mph ( 345 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 872 mbar ( hPa ; 25.75 inHg ) , Patricia is the most intense tropical cyclone ever observed in the Western Hemisphere .
In terms of central pressure , it is also the second - most intense tropical cyclone ever recorded worldwide , just shy of Typhoon Tip in 1979 which had a minimum pressure of 870 mbar ( hPa ; 25.69 inHg ) .
Patricia 's one - minute maximum sustained winds ranked as the highest ever reliably observed or estimated in a tropical cyclone , surpassing Typhoon Haiyan of 2013 .
The magnitude of Patricia 's rapid intensification is among the fastest ever observed .
In a 24-hour period , 06:00–06:00 UTC October 22–23 , its maximum sustained winds increased from 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) to 205 mph ( 335 km / h ) , a record increase of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) .
During the same period , Patricia 's central pressure fell by 95 mbar ( hPa ; 2.81 inHg ) .
Despite record over - water weakening prior to striking Mexico , Patricia became the most intense Pacific hurricane to make landfall , with a pressure of 932 mbar ( hPa ; 27.52 inHg ) .
PREPARATIONS Section::::Preparations .
Before Hurricane Patricia arrived , the Government of Mexico issued multiple watches and warnings for coastal communities .
A hurricane watch was first raised at 09:00 UTC on October 21 , encompassing areas of Michoacán , Colima , and Jalisco .
A tropical storm watch also covered portions of Guerrero .
As Patricia intensified , the government issued a hurricane warning for areas between Cabo Corrientes , Jalisco , and Punta San Telmo , Michoacán ; a tropical storm warning supplemented this for areas farther north and east .
The hurricane warning was extended northward to include areas south of San Blas , Nayarit , on October 23 .
Once the storm moved inland and the threat of damaging winds diminished , these warnings were gradually discontinued on October 24 .
Following Patricia 's upgrade to Category 5 status , the National Hurricane Center called the storm " potentially catastrophic " , a source of criticism and praise from various media .
Citing the relatively limited damage and loss of life , some outlets , including the Associated Press , claimed the agency was exaggerating the danger posed by the storm .
However , most outlets praised them for effectively communicating the dire threat and potentially saving lives from an exceptionally powerful hurricane .
Across Michoacán , Colima , Jalisco , and Nayarit , 1,782 shelters were opened on October 22 with a collective capacity of 258,000 people .
Officials in Manzanillo began distributing sandbags during the afternoon of October 22 .
Schools across Guerrero and Jalisco suspended activities for October 22 and 23 , respectively .
Civil protection officials planned to evacuate roughly 50,000 people from Colima , Jalisco , and Nayarit .
To expedite the process , 2 aircraft and 600 buses were used to shuttle evacuees .
Ultimately , 8,500 people evacuated prior to the storm 's arrival , including 2,600 in Cabo Corrientes .
One person died during an evacuation in Jalisco .
Roughly 25,000 personnel from the Mexican Army , Navy , and Federal Police were deployed preemptively .
More than 500 Red Cross volunteers were on standby .
The Mexican Red Cross prepositioned food for 3,500 families .
Approximately of aid was prepositioned in Colima for distribution after the hurricane 's passage .
The Electric Federal Commission dispatched 2,500 crewmen , 152 cranes , 15 all - terrain vehicles , 4 helicopters , and 84 generators to cope with potential power outages .
Mexican authorities received praise for effectively carrying out emergency preparations .
IMPACT FROM PRECURSOR
DISTURBANCE Section::::Impact from precursor disturbance .
The precursor of Patricia was a large and sprawling system that affected much of Central America with heavy rain for several days .
Rainfall was enhanced by the presence of multiple systems , including a tropical wave and a second disturbance over the Caribbean Sea .
One person was killed in the Alta Verapaz Department and approximately 2,100 people required evacuation across Guatemala .
A total of 442 homes and of crops were damaged while roughly 223,000 people were affected by flooding .
Government officials deployed emergency teams and 40 million quetzal ( US$ 5.4 million ) was available for relief operations .
In nearby El Salvador between of rain fell , causing similar floods .
Dozens of homes were affected and four people were killed .
The Goascorán River overflowed its banks twice in two days , inundating surrounding communities .
Owing to widespread flooding , authorities suspended school activities across the country on October 19 .
In Nicaragua , a landslide buried four miners in Bonanza ; one died while the others were rescued .
The Ulúa River in Honduras over - topped its banks for the first time in 17 years on October 18 , prompting the evacuation of more than 200 people .
Furthermore , flooding damaged 10 homes in Jacó , Costa Rica .
The aforementioned rains extended into Southwestern and Northeastern Mexico , falling from October 18–20 ; precipitation was enhanced by another tropical disturbance over the northwestern Caribbean Sea .
Portions of Quintana Roo saw their most intense rainfall event on record , with observed in Chetumal .
This surpassed the previous record of during Hurricane Wilma in 2005 .
Flooding affected approximately 1,500 homes in the city , with 150 people seeking refuge in public shelters .
Damage in Chetumal was pegged at 1.4 billion pesos ( US$ 84.1 million ) .
Seven municipalities were declared disaster areas accordingly .
In nearby Veracruz , more than of rain caused widespread flooding ; at least 50 municipalities reported damage from the event as multiple rivers over - topped their banks .
Flooding in Tabasco affected of crops .
In Oaxaca , several roads were washed out by the accompanying floods and mudslides , particularly in the Sierra Norte region .
Widespread flooding affected large areas of Chiapas and Guerrero , prompting dozens of evacuations .
In Tapachula , Chiapas , of rain fell in just 90 minutes , triggering flash floods that caught residents by surprise .
Hundreds of families were affected and 64 homes were damaged or destroyed .
IMPACT
AS A TROPICAL CYCLONE MEXICO Section::::Impact as a tropical cyclone .
Section::::Mexico .
Hurricane Patricia made landfall in Jalisco as a Category 4 hurricane during the evening of October 23 .
The wide core of Patricia largely avoided populated centers , passing through areas with a population density less than 30 people per square mile .
This , alongside effective evacuations , is credited for the relatively low death toll , despite the hurricane 's intensity .
Several small communities along the path sustained tremendous damage , however .
Had the hurricane moved farther east or west , the densely populated areas surrounding Manzanillo or Puerto Vallarta would have suffered a direct hit .
Throughout the affected region , the storm 's powerful winds left 261,989 people without electricity .
Twenty - one of the nation 's thirty - one states , and the Federal District , were affected by the hurricane 's rain .
Accumulations in Jalisco peaked at on Nevado de Colima .
Roughly of crops were affected across Colima , Jalisco , Michoacán , and Nayarit , with deemed a total loss and partially damaged .
Six deaths occurred due to direct or indirect effects of the hurricane , all in Jalisco .
Damage assessments indicate total losses around 5.4 billion pesos ( US$ 323.3 million ) , primarily from agriculture and infrastructure .
JALISCO Section::::Jalisco .
Striking Jalisco as a strong Category 4 hurricane , Patricia wrought tremendous damage , though the most extreme effects were relatively localized .
In the small community of Emiliano Zapata , the hurricane 's violent winds tore roofs off homes and business .
Countless trees were defoliated , stripped of their branches , snapped , or uprooted .
Hillsides along the immediate landfall area were largely stripped of vegetation .
Storm chaser Josh Morgerman described the aftermath : " ...
the tropical landscape was transformed into something barren and wintry . "
Furthermore , the winds toppled concrete power poles and crumpled transmission towers .
Throughout Jalisco , approximately 9,000 homes were damaged or destroyed .
The coastal hamlet of Chamela , home to 40 families , was completely flattened .
More than of crops were affected across the state :
sustained total losses while were partially so .
Damage from agriculture amounted to roughly 168 million pesos ( US$ 10.1 million ) .
Total damage reached to 1.139 billion pesos ( US$ 68.7 million ) .
A total of six deaths in incidents related to Patricia were reported in the state .
Two of these deaths occurred when a tree toppled over in the storm 's powerful winds .
A woman was also hospitalized after sustaining injuries in the same incident .
Another four people were killed in an automobile accident in southern Jalisco .
Two of the victims died in the wreckage and the other two died after being brought to a hospital .
A cargo ship — the bulk carrier Los Llanitos — was shifted off - course by the hurricane and grounded near Barra de Navidad , Jalisco .
Her 27 crew were unharmed but required rescue by a military helicopter .
The ship was subsequently deemed a total loss and crews began scrapping the vessel on - site in February 2016 .
COLIMA AND MICHOACÁN Section::::Colima and Michoacán .
In nearby Colima , preliminary surveys indicated localized but severe damage .
A total of 200 schools , 107 health facilities , 34 sport facilities , and of agriculture was affected by the storm .
Severe damage was incurred by the banana crops , with losses from the fruit alone estimated at 500 million pesos ( US$ 30.2 million ) .
Total damage in the state reached 1.7 billion pesos ( US$ 102.6 million ) .
Although Patricia made landfall farther west , damage across Michoacán was severe .
Numerous communities were temporarily isolated as roads were either rendered impassible or washed away altogether by floods .
A total of 1,512 homes were damaged and another 127 were destroyed across the state , including 600 in Coahuayana .
The storm severely damaged 150 homes in the Arteaga Municipality .
A portion of Highway 200 was shut down in Aquila .
Agriculture sustained extensive damage with of crops destroyed ; losses in the sector amounted to 2.5 billion pesos ( US$ 151.2 million ) .
In Coahuayana alone , of bananas were ruined , the greatest loss of crops in the municipality 's history ; thousands of residents lost their jobs as a result of the damage .
Losses to health facilities in the state reached 13.5 million pesos ( US$ 815,000 ) .
OTHER STATES
Section::::Other states .
The hurricane produced large swells along the shores of Guerrero on October 22 , causing damage to coastal structures .
The remnants of Patricia brought heavy rain to much of northern Mexico on October 24 .
Up to of rain was observed in Tamaulipas , resulting in flooding .
Dozens of structures sustained damage and hundreds were left without power , with areas in Reynosa and Río Bravo particularly affected .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
Patricia 's direct effects in Texas were limited to southern areas of the state .
Moisture associated with the hurricane streamed ahead of its circulation and interacted with a frontal boundary over the region .
Antecedent rains saturated the region and produced severe flooding , with cars flooded and a train derailed .
Fears arose that the collective effects of these storms would produce deadly floods , similar to those in May earlier in the year ; however , no deaths resulted .
Houston received of rain during a 24-hour span from October 24–25 , and a brief tornado caused minor damage near the city .
Rain fell at rates of per hour in southern Hidalgo County , leading to damaging flash floods .
An estimated , or more , accumulated across the Progreso – Weslaco area .
Several feet of water rendered roads impassible , stranded cars , and affected more than 500 homes .
Twenty - six water rescues were conducted in the area .
Damage was estimated at $ 50 million .
Several roads in and around Corpus Christi were inundated , including part of Interstate 37 .
Two hours of " blinding rains " flooded the majority of eastern Willacy County , prompting multiple water rescues , and leaving $ 2.5 million in damage .
Remnant moisture then moved north and northwest through the Great Lakes , Appalachia and Mid - Atlantic states , and Florida Pandhandle before exiting the nation .
AFTERMATH Section::::Aftermath .
In the aftermath of the hurricane , 5,791 Marines from Mexico 's Naval Infantry Force were deployed to assist with recovery and rescue efforts .
Rescuers reached some of the hardest - hit areas within a day of Patricia 's landfall .
Red Cross volunteers began needs assessments on October 24 and distribution of humanitarian aid started the following day .
Power was restored to 88 percent of those affected within two days of the storm .
Through the nation 's livestock catastrophe fund , 150 million pesos ( US$ 9 million ) were allocated for agricultural areas affected by the storm on October 29 .
Of this total , 76 million pesos ( US$ 4.6 million ) were delegated to Jalisco .
The Secretariat of Social Development 's budget allowed for 250 million pesos ( US$ 15.1 million ) in relief funds for Jalisco .
Of this , 34 million pesos ( US$ 2 million ) were allocated for affected persons .
On October 27 , Rafael Pacchiano Alamán announced an initial fund of 5.3 million pesos ( US$ 318,000 ) through the Temporary Employment Program ( Programa de Empleo Temporal ) to help spur economic recovery in Colima .
On October 28 , 15 of Jalisco 's 125 municipalities were declared disaster areas ; assessments were ongoing in 5–10 other municipalities to potentially be added to this declaration .
Of the more than of crops affected by Patricia in Jalisco , only were covered by insurance .
Through late January 2016 , provided entrepreneurs with 3.577 million pesos ( US$ 194,000 ) in funds .
In January 2016 , the Michoacán Ministry of Social Development enacted a 10 million peso ( US$ 542,000 ) rehabilitation program to build 605 homes in affected communities .
RETIREMENT Section::::Retirement .
Due to the hurricane 's extreme intensity , the name Patricia was retired by the World Meteorological Organization on April 25 , 2016 .
It will be replaced with Pamela for the 2021 Pacific hurricane season .
SEE ALSO
* List of the most intense tropical cyclones * List of tropical cyclone records Other Category 5 Pacific hurricanes that made landfall in Mexico :
* Hurricane Kenna in 2002 – Made landfall at Category 4 intensity north of where Patricia made landfall * Hurricane Rick in 2009 – Made landfall as a tropical storm , developed around the same time of the year
* Hurricane Willa in 2018 – Made landfall at Category 3 intensity north of where Patricia made landfall Other record - strength tropical cyclones : * Hurricane Linda in 1997 – Previous record intensity in eastern Pacific basin , during a similarly strong El Niño event * Typhoon Megi in 2010 – Research reconnaissance observed similarly intense sustained winds
* Typhoon Haiyan in 2013 – Most intense landfalling tropical cyclone in terms of wind speed
*
Typhoon Nancy in 1961 – Highest winds observed in a tropical cyclone , tied with Patricia , but considered unreliable *
Typhoon Tip in 1979 – Most intense tropical cyclone recorded in terms of pressure
* Hurricane Wilma in 2005 – Previous record low central pressure in the Western Hemisphere * Hurricane Allen in 1980 –
Previous record high sustained winds in the Western Hemisphere
* Typhoon Forrest in 1983 – Record - fastest intensification of any tropical cyclone ; underwent a 100 mbar ( hPa ; 2.95 inHg ) pressure drop in a day NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * The National Hurricane Center 's advisory archive for Hurricane Patricia
* The National Hurricane Center 's advisory graphics archive for Hurricane Patricia * for Hurricane Patricia
* ReliefWeb page for Hurricane Patricia