FARGO ( SEASON 3 )
The third season of Fargo , an American anthology black comedy – crime drama television series created by Noah Hawley , premiered on April 19 , 2017 , on the basic cable network FX .
The season had ten episodes , and its initial airing concluded on June 21 , 2017 .
As an anthology , each Fargo season possesses its own self - contained narrative , following a disparate set of characters in various settings , albeit in a connected shared universe .
The third season is set primarily between December 2010 and March 2011 , in three Minnesota towns : St. Cloud , Eden Valley , and Eden Prairie , and is the only season to not feature the titular Fargo , North Dakota .
It follows the lives of a couple , Ray Stussy ( Ewan McGregor ) and Nikki Swango ( Mary Elizabeth Winstead ) , who , after unsuccessfully trying to rob Ray 's brother Emmit ( also played by McGregor ) , become involved in a double murder case .
One of the victims is an old man with a mysterious past whose stepdaughter , Gloria Burgle ( Carrie Coon ) , is a policewoman .
Meanwhile , Emmit tries to cut his ties with a shady organization he borrowed money from a year before , but the company , represented by V. M. Varga ( David Thewlis ) has other plans .
Season 3 began filming in early 2017 in Calgary , Alberta .
CAST MAIN * Ewan McGregor as brothers Emmit and Raymond " Ray " Stussy .
Emmit is a financially successful , happily married man and the self - proclaimed " Parking Lot King of Minnesota .
"
Younger brother Ray is a financially struggling probation officer who feels betrayed by Emmit over the way their father 's inheritance was divided between them , when Ray got his father 's Corvette and Emmit got a valuable stamp collection .
McGregor also voiced the Captain , the android Minsky 's scientist companion .
* Carrie Coon as Gloria Burgle , a dedicated police officer and police chief of Eden Valley until the department is absorbed by the county .
She is trying to solve her stepfather 's murder .
*
Mary Elizabeth Winstead as Nikki Swango , a crafty and alluring young woman with a passion for competitive bridge .
She is a recent parolee and Ray 's fiancée .
* David Thewlis as V. M. Varga , an unscrupulous British businessman with whom Emmit unwillingly finds himself in a partnership .
* Goran Bogdan as Yuri Gurka , a Ukrainian man working for V. M. Varga .
RECURRING GUEST STARS Section::::Cast .
Section::::Guest stars .
Billy Bob Thornton , who appeared as Lorne Malvo in season one , narrates Peter and the Wolf in the fourth episode , " The Narrow Escape Problem " .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
PRODUCTION
CASTING
Section::::Production .
Section::::Casting .
Ewan McGregor was cast in the lead dual role as Emmit Stussy and Ray Stussy , and Carrie Coon plays the lead female role , Gloria Burgle .
In September 2016 , Mary Elizabeth Winstead was cast in a major role as Nikki Swango and Scoot McNairy in a recurring role .
In November 2016 , it was announced that Jim Gaffigan had joined the main cast in the role of Donny Mashman , Gloria Burgle 's partner .
However , it was later announced that Gaffigan would not appear in the season due to scheduling conflicts .
Mark Forward was later cast to replace him as Mashman , and Mashman 's role in the story was reduced .
In December 2016 , several new actors joined the cast , including David Thewlis , Michael Stuhlbarg , Shea Whigham , Fred Melamed and Thomas Mann .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Filming began in early 2017 in Calgary , Alberta , where the previous two seasons were also filmed .
Regarding filming with Ewan McGregor while he is portraying dual roles , co - star Mary Elizabeth Winstead stated , " For some takes , I was standing with Ewan 's double and for some takes , I was standing with Ewan . "
She added , " Watching how the doubles interact with him and have to learn his way of walking and his posture and his way of standing was interesting .
They make it feel very natural and grounded and real .
They 're reading the lines and the scenes are existing as they would regularly , just swapping out the people .
Which is somewhat strange , but it still does n't feel like you 're doing a trick of any sort . "
VISUAL STYLE Section::::Visual style .
As with the previous two seasons , the third season had its own distinct visual style , achieved through color grading by removing the blue channel , as Noah Hawley explained : " So you take the blue channel on the digital image and you just dial it out .
And what you end up with is a very distinctive look in which colors like red and orange and yellow ; they just really pop in a different way .
Usually in cold weather you add blue , because blue denotes cold .
So it was interesting to take the blue out and see what it did to the image .
And once we did that it became clear that it does n't look at all like any of the other years , which I really liked . "
RECEPTION REVIEWS Section::::Reception .
Section::::Reviews .
The third season has received acclaim from critics .
On Metacritic , it has a score of 89 out of 100 based on 32 reviews , indicating " universal acclaim . "
On Rotten Tomatoes , it has a 93 % " certified fresh " rating with an average score of 8.56 out of 10 based on 50 reviews .
The site 's critical consensus reads : "
Thanks in part to a memorable dual performance from Ewan McGregor , Fargo mostly maintains the sly wit and off - kilter sensibility it displayed in its first two seasons . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
In addition to the six Emmy nominations listed below , the series earned an additional ten nominations in various technical and creative categories . !
Ceremony !
Category !
Nominee(s ) !
Result REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS