47 METERS DOWN
47 Meters Down is a 2017 survival horror film directed by Johannes Roberts , written by Roberts and Ernest Riera , and starring Claire Holt and Mandy Moore .
The plot follows two sisters who go on holiday in Mexico , and are invited to cage dive and see sharks up close .
When the cable holding the cage breaks and it plummets to the ocean floor with the two girls trapped inside , they must find a way to escape , with their air supplies running low and great white sharks stalking nearby .
It was released in the United States on 16 June 2017 , and in the United Kingdom on 26 July 2017 .
The film received mixed reviews but was a box office success , grossing over $ 61 million worldwide against a budget of about $ 5 million .
A sequel , titled , is scheduled for a release on 28 June 2019 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Lisa and Kate are sisters on vacation in Mexico .
Lisa 's boyfriend broke up with her because " she made the relationship boring " .
Kate tries to cheer Lisa up and takes her out drinking and dancing , where they meet a pair of local men at a bar who convince them to go out with them to watch sharks from a diving cage .
Lisa hesitates , but Kate argues it would show Lisa 's boyfriend that she is n't boring and make him regret breaking up with her .
The sisters arrive at the boat dock ; Lisa is immediately wary of the boat and its owner , Captain Taylor .
The captain asks if the sisters are experienced divers ; Kate is certified but Lisa is new to diving , so they lie and say they are both experienced .
The dive cage is old and rusty and hangs from thin chains on an old crane , adding further to Lisa 's apprehensions .
When they reach the diving spot , Captain Taylor baits the sharks .
Lisa is skeptical about the entire dive , but Captain Taylor dismisses her concerns .
The locals dive first in the cage .
Unbeknownst to everyone on the boat , the cable supporting the cage starts to fray .
The men return to the surface and Captain Taylor prepares to send Lisa and Kate down .
When Lisa and Kate are in the cage , the cable breaks and the cage sinks to the bottom , some 47 meters below the surface and out of communication range with the boat .
Kate swims up seven meters to resume communications with Captain Taylor , who tells her Javier will be coming down with a spare winch to attach to the cage .
He also advises them to stay in the cage as the sharks are circling .
Both women are quickly running out of air , but they wait in the cage until they see a flashlight in the distance .
Lisa swims out to get Javier 's attention , as Kate 's air is lower due to the previous swim .
Lisa swims towards the light , close to the bottom to avoid shark attacks from below .
A shark tries to attack Lisa but she swims into a small grotto to avoid it .
Lisa finds the flashlight but not Javier .
While looking around for him , she becomes disoriented about her position and Kate 's location .
Javier appears and attempts to usher her back towards safety , but he is attacked and killed by a shark .
Lisa takes Javier 's spear gun and the spare winch , and swims back toward the cage .
After the spare is attached , Lisa swims up and notifies Taylor to pull them up ; however , the replacement winch line also snaps and the cage sinks back to the bottom .
The cage lands on Lisa 's leg , pinning her .
Lisa and Kate panic as they realize they are now both out of options and air .
Kate swims back up to communication range to tell Taylor they are low on air and that Lisa is pinned .
Taylor sends some air tanks down and tells them the coast guard is an hour out .
He also warns her that the second tank may cause nitrogen narcosis which can lead to hallucinations .
Kate finds the air tanks just as her original tank runs empty .
She also finds three flares to signal the coast guard .
As she returns to the cage , Kate is attacked and presumably killed by a shark .
Lisa , still pinned and running low on air , uses the spear from the spear gun to pull a spare tank toward her .
In the process , the spear cuts her hand .
She dons the new tank , and then hears Kate over the radio .
Kate is injured and low on air , and her blood is attracting more sharks .
Lisa says she will find her , and uses her BCD to lift up the cage , freeing her leg .
After Lisa finds Kate , Taylor tells them the coast guard is still some time out
and they need to get back in the cage .
Lisa adamantly refuses due to the nature of Kate 's wounds , and they decide to swim to the surface .
As they swim to the surface , they use one of the three flares to scare the sharks .
At the 20-meter mark , they are reminded by Taylor they must wait five minutes to decompress and avoid the bends .
As the first flare burns out , Kate tries to light the second flare but drops it
and it sinks to the bottom .
As she lights the third flare she sees three sharks close in front of her .
The sisters are now surrounded by sharks and must rush to the surface .
Taylor yells for them to drop their gear and make a break for the surface .
They swim as fast as they can toward the boat .
One of the sharks bites Lisa 's leg and pulls her back down into the water .
Lisa manages to escape and starts to swim towards the boat again .
Both women make it to the boat and reach up to get pulled in .
As they are getting pulled in , a shark jumps out of the water and grabs Lisa by the leg , pulling her down again .
Lisa hits the shark and gouges its eye out , and the shark releases her .
Captain Taylor and the other men pull Lisa and Kate onto the boat and begin administering first aid .
However , as Lisa stares at her hand on the deck of the boat , she realizes she has been hallucinating due to nitrogen narcosis .
She realizes she is still at the bottom with her leg pinned by the cage .
Coast guard divers arrive to rescue her and carry Lisa to the surface .
Lisa comes out of her hallucination and realizes her sister is not with her .
CAST
* Mandy Moore as Lisa , the older sister * Claire Holt as Kate , the younger sister * Chris J. Johnson as Javier * Yani Gellman as Louis * Santiago Segura as Benjamin
* Matthew Modine as Captain Taylor * Mayra Juarez as Sammie
* Axel Mansilla as Band Leader PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Principal photography began in July 2015 and concluded the following month .
Additional photography took place in January 2016 .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Original distributor Dimension Films had initially set a North American DVD and VOD release date for 2 August 2016 .
However , on 25 July 2016 , Variety reported that Dimension had sold the rights to Entertainment Studios .
Entertainment Studios cancelled the 2 August home release and instead committed to a theatrical release in the United States in summer 2017 .
The working title for the film was 47 Meters Down , which Dimension had changed to In the Deep for their home release , but upon acquiring the film Entertainment Studios reverted to the original title .
Dimension had already sent out screeners and shipped DVDs to retailers before the deal took place .
The DVDs , under the title In the Deep , were recalled ; however , several retailers broke the street date , and a handful of physical copies were sold and have since turned up on eBay as collectors ' items .
After the purchase , Entertainment Studios reverted to the original title 47 Meters Down .
The film was released theatrically in the United Kingdom on 26 July 2017 & United States on 16 June 2017 , and spent about $ 30 million on promotion and advertisement .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
47 Meters Down grossed $ 44.3 million in the United States and Canada and $ 17.4 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 61.7 million , against a production budget of $ 5.5 million .
In North America , 47 Meters Down was released alongside All Eyez on Me , Rough Night and Cars 3 , and was initially projected to gross around $ 5 million from 2,300 theatres in its opening weekend .
It made $ 4.5 million on its first day ( including $ 735,000 from Thursday night previews ) , increasing weekend estimates to $ 11 million .
It went on to debut to $ 11.5 million , finishing 5th at the box office .
In its second weekend , the film dropped 34 % , grossing $ 7.4 million and finishing 4th at the box office .
It was one of the highest - grossing indie films of 2017 .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 55 % based on 139 reviews , with an average rating of 5.4/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " 47 Meters Down does n't take its terrifying premise quite as far as it should , but its toothy antagonists still offer a few thrills for less demanding genre enthusiasts .
"
On Metacritic , which assigns a normalised rating , the film has a score of 52 out of 100 , based on 24 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " C " on an A+ to F scale , while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave it an 55 % overall positive score .
ACCOLADES Saturn Awards
SEQUEL
Section::::Sequel .
On 8 September 2017 , it was announced that production studio , The Fyzz Facility , is working on a sequel titled 48 Meters Down , in which Roberts , Riera , and Harris will both return as director / writer , co - writer , and producer , respectively .
The sequel will take place in Brazil and center around a group of young women who decide to explore some hidden underwater ruins located off - the - beaten trail .
Production will be overseen by Altitude Film Sales , with potential buyers currently being sought in Toronto .
Entertainment Studios will once again handle distribution for the film , with a planned release of 28 June 2019 .
In August 2018 , the film 's first trailer was released with a new official title 47 Meters Down : The Next Chapter .
By December of the same year , the official title of the film will be .
The film will star John Corbett , Nia Long , Sophie Nelisse , Corinne Foxx , Sistine Stallone , Brianne Tju , Davi Santos and Khylin Rhambo .
SEE ALSO REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS