OKJA
Okja is a 2017 action - adventure film directed by Bong Joon - ho and written by Bong and Jon Ronson .
The film stars an ensemble cast headed by South Korean child actress Ahn Seo - hyun , South Korean actors Ahn Seo - hyun , Byun Hee - bong , Yoon Je - moon , and Choi Woo - shik , and Hollywood actors Tilda Swinton in a dual role , Paul Dano , Steven Yeun , Lily Collins , Shirley Henderson , Daniel Henshall , Devon Bostick , Giancarlo Esposito , and Jake Gyllenhaal .
The film competed for the Palme d'Or in the main competition section at the 2017 Cannes Film Festival .
It was released on Netflix on June 28 , 2017 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 2007 , self - styled ' environmentalist ' Lucy Mirando becomes CEO of the Mirando Corporation , succeeding her twin sister Nancy .
She announces that they have been breeding a special kind of " super pig " .
The twenty - six produced specimens are sent to farmers in different locations around the world , and ten years later , one of them will be crowned the winner of a competition to breed the best pig .
In 2017 , a young girl named Mija lives in South Korea with her grandfather and their super pig , Okja .
They are visited by Mirando spokesperson and zoologist Dr. Johnny Wilcox , who declares Okja the best super pig and announces they will take her to New York City .
Mija 's grandfather presents her with a gold pig and explains to her that he saved up money to buy the solid gold item to replace Okja when she was taken away .
Devastated , Mija runs away to Seoul to find Okja , where she sees her as she is being loaded onto a truck .
Mija chases down the truck but it is intercepted by the Animal Liberation Front ( ALF ) .
In the resulting chaos , Mija and Okja run away but are eventually saved by the ALF , led by Jay .
Jay uses another ALF member , K , as a translator to tell Mija that they plan to put a recording device in Okja 's ear and let her be re - captured by the Mirando corporation to show how they mistreat their animals .
Mija tells them to return her to the mountains but K tells the group that Mija is in agreement with their plan .
They abandon her , and Okja is recaptured .
To minimise the PR damage to the company , Lucy pays for Mija to come to New York to be reunited with her pig .
Okja is taken to a laboratory where she is forcibly bred with another super pig and flesh is taken from her for a taste test .
After the ALF sees the footage , K reveals that he lied to the rest of the group about Mija 's support of the plan .
Jay attacks K , and expels him from the ALF .
In New York City , Mija is forced to agree to the wishes of the Mirando corporation .
Jay slips into her room and tells her that they plan to rescue Okja while on stage .
A parade is put on by the Mirando Corporation .
Okja , blinded and battered , does not recognize Mija and attacks .
Jay tries to hurt Okja , but Mija prevents him , calming Okja down .
A video of the mistreatment of Okja is screened by the ALF to the public , who quickly turn on the Mirando Corporation .
Mija and the ALF attempt to escape with Okja but fail .
Okja is recaptured and the ALF members are arrested , except for Mija and Jay who are rescued by K. Nancy , having returned to control the company , closes the lab , scraps all of Lucy 's promotional marketing , and starts full - time operations at their slaughterhouse .
Jay and K take Mija to find Okja at the processing plant and find her being forced up a ramp leading into a slaughterhouse .
Mija finds Okja as she is about to be killed and shows the Mirando employee a photograph of herself with a baby Okja .
Nancy arrives and
Mija offers the golden pig in exchange for Okja 's life .
Nancy agrees to the deal and has Jay and K arrested .
As Mija and Okja are leave a pair of superpigs manages to push their newborn through the fence , and Okja hides it within her mouth to take it away .
Back in the countryside , Mija resumes her life with her grandfather , Okja , and the new piglet .
In a post - credits scene , Jay is released from prison and gets on board a bus with K and the other members of the organization .
With their newest member Kim Woo - shik , a former driver for Mirando Corporation , they plan to disrupt a major meeting involving all of the Mirando shareholders .
CAST
* Ahn Seo - hyun as Mija , a young farmgirl who takes care of Okja .
* Tilda Swinton as Lucy Mirando , the eccentric powerful CEO of the Mirando Corporation looking to profit from Okja .
* Swinton also plays Nancy Mirando , Lucy 's twin sister , the cruel former CEO of the Mirando Corporation .
* Paul Dano as Jay , the leader of an animal - rights activist group , the Animal Liberation Front ( ALF ) .
*
Byun Hee - bong as Heebong , Mija 's grandfather .
* Steven Yeun as K , an animal - rights activist and ALF member , who serves as translator between Mija and the rest of the ALF .
* Lily Collins as Red , an animal - rights activist and ALF member .
* Yoon Je - moon as Mundo Park
* Shirley Henderson as Jennifer , Lucy 's assistant .
* Daniel Henshall as Blond , animal - rights activist , ALF member , and boyfriend of Silver .
* Devon Bostick as Silver , animal - rights activist , ALF member , and boyfriend of Blond .
* Choi Woo - shik as Kim Woo - shik , a young driver for the Mirando Corporation .
* Giancarlo Esposito as Frank Dawson , an associate with the Mirando Corporation .
* Jake Gyllenhaal as Johnny Wilcox , a disturbed zoologist and TV personality .
* Choi Hee - seo as Interpreter DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION Section::::Development and production .
In October 2015 , it was announced that director Bong Joon - ho 's next film will feature a South Korean female lead and a cast of English - speaking supporting actors , with filming set in New York .
On November 10 , 2015 it was picked up by Netflix and Plan B Entertainment with a budget of $ 50 million , with production starting in late 2016 for release in 2017 .
Darius Khondji joined the film as cinematographer in February 2016 .
Bong sought out Welsh author Jon Ronson to help with the script .
Working with a rough draft of the story , Ronson helped develop the English - speaking characters .
Principal photography began on April 22 , 2016 in Seoul , South Korea .
It moved to Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada for more filming on July 31 , 2016 .
Director Bong Joon - ho visited a real Colorado slaughterhouse to prepare for the film 's own slaughterhouse sequence , an experience that converted Joon - ho and producer Dooho Choi into temporary vegans .
Joon - ho has called Okja " a very shy and introverted animal .
It 's a unique animal that we 've not seen before . "
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Okja had its world premiere at the 2017 Cannes Film Festival on May 18 , 2017 .
During the first few minutes of its screening at its Cannes premiere , the film was met with boos mixed with some applause twice : once when the Netflix logo appeared on the screen and again during a technical glitch which projected the film in an incorrect aspect ratio for its first seven minutes .
The festival later issued an apology to its filmmakers for projecting the film incorrectly .
However , despite the initially negative audience response , the film received a four - minute standing ovation at its end .
The film was released on Netflix on June 28 , 2017 .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
Several independent theatres in South Korea screened the film to much success , with earnings totalling 2,271,855,400 KRW ( 2,128,019 USD ) from 300,953 tickets sold .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On the film review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 87 % based on 204 reviews , with a weighted average of 7.5/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Okja sees Bong Joon - ho continuing to create defiantly eclectic entertainment – and still hitting more than enough of his narrative targets in the midst of a tricky tonal juggling act .
" On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 75 out of 100 , based on 36 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Critic A.O. Scott wrote , " Okja is a miracle of imagination and technique , and Okja insists , with abundant mischief and absolute sincerity , that she possesses a soul . "
ACCOLADES 70th Cannes Film Festival
Palme d'Or Bong Joon - ho
SEE ALSO
* Genetically modified food
* Meat industry REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS