DETROIT :
BECOME HUMAN Detroit :
Become Human is an adventure game developed by Quantic Dream and published by Sony Interactive Entertainment for PlayStation 4 , released worldwide on 25 May 2018 .
The plot revolves around three androids : Kara ( Valorie Curry ) , who escapes the owner she was serving to explore her newfound sentience and protect a young girl ; Connor ( Bryan Dechart ) , whose job is to hunt down sentient androids ; and Markus ( Jesse Williams ) , who devotes himself to releasing other androids from servitude .
They may survive or perish depending on dialogue choices that shape the story .
Detroit :
Become Human is based on Quantic Dream 's 2012 technology demonstration Kara ; Curry returned to reprise the title role .
To research the setting , the developers visited Detroit , Michigan .
The script took writer and director David Cage , who consulted artificial intelligence experts , over two years to complete .
They built a new engine to complement the game and cast hundreds of actors before commencing the process of shooting and animation .
Philip Sheppard , Nima Fakhrara , and John Paesano served as composers for Kara , Connor , and Markus , respectively .
Detroit :
Become Human was met with generally favourable reviews from critics , who praised the setting , visuals , smaller moments in the story , main characters , their voice actors , the impact choices had on the narrative , and flowchart feature , but criticised the motion controls , mishandling of historical and thematic allegories , and aspects of the plot and characters .
The game is Quantic Dream 's most successful launch , with sales exceeding 2 million .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
Detroit :
Become Human is an adventure game played from a third - person view , which is subject to a set and controllable perspective .
There are multiple playable characters who can die as the story continues without them ; as a result , there is no " game over " message following a character 's death .
The right analogue stick on the DualShock controller is used to interact with objects and observe one 's surroundings , the left is for movement , and R2 scans an environment for possible actions ; the motion controls and touchpad are also employed .
Via quick time events and dialogue decisions , the story will branch out depending on which choices are made .
These can be viewed in a flowchart during and immediately after a given chapter ; the player can rewind to certain points in the story to reshape decisions in the event of regret .
Certain scenes feature countdowns , which force the player to think and act quickly .
Levels abound with magazines for players to read .
The playable characters are : * Connor , a police investigator android tasked with hunting down androids that have deviated from their programmed behaviours .
* Kara , a housekeeper android who develops artificial consciousness and becomes responsible for a young girl 's safety .
* Markus , a caretaker android who , after gaining consciousness , takes it upon himself to free others like him from bondage .
Obtaining clues by highlighting and analysing the environment with augmented vision allows Connor to reconstruct and replay events that occurred before .
The more information Connor collects within an allotted time , the greater the chance of success in deciding a course of action .
Markus has the power to grant androids free will and calculate the outcomes of certain acts .
SYNOPSIS
Section::::Synopsis .
Caretaker android Markus and his owner return home and alert the police of a suspected burglary .
In confronting the perpetrator , Markus bypasses his programming , thereby becoming a deviant android with full autonomy , leading the police to shoot him at arrival .
Markus awakes in a landfill of broken androids and , after escaping , discovers Jericho , a wrecked ship and safe haven for deviants .
There , Markus rallies the others to fight for their rights .
They perform several acts of civil disobedience , which catches the public 's attention and gets more androids to join .
This culminates with the FBI attacking Jericho .
If he survives , Markus and the others set up a final march , resulting in either all of the deviants being killed or the president opening peace talks .
Police investigator android Connor is sent by the CyberLife corporation to assist Lieutenant Hank Anderson , an alcoholic who hates androids .
In the course of their investigation into an outbreak of deviants , they either bond or fall apart , potentially resulting in Hank committing suicide .
During his hunt for Markus ' group , Connor starts to doubt himself , though he can stay firm in his beliefs .
He eventually locates Jericho , where he can become a deviant himself .
If he defects , Connor infiltrates CyberLife Tower and converts everyone there into deviants .
If not , he attempts to snipe Markus during the final protest , but is stopped by a SWAT team or Hank .
In the end , if peace is achieved , Connor can choose whether or not to shoot Markus during a speech .
Kara , a housekeeper android for Todd Williams and his daughter Alice , escapes with her after he attacks them and leaves Kara a deviant .
The two travel across Detroit , intending to make it to Canada , which has no specific laws involving androids and where they will be safe .
Kara and Alice befriend another android named Luther along the way , who joins them on their journey .
They seek the aid of an android sympathiser , who points them to Jericho to obtain passports .
They get caught up in the attack there , which may result in Luther , Kara , and Alice 's deaths .
Kara also learns that Alice is in fact an android , replacing the daughter taken away by Todd 's wife .
They can make it to Canada by bus or boat , survive a recycling centre , or in either case die trying .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Detroit :
Become
Human had a development budget of € 30 million .
The game is based on Quantic Dream 's 2012 PlayStation 3 technology demonstration Kara , which received strong reactions and an award at the LA Shorts Fest .
It starred Valorie Curry , who would later reprise the title role .
Writer and director David Cage wanted to make the demo into a full game , despite not originally having planned to , because he was curious as to what would happen next .
He took inspiration from Ray Kurzweil 's The Singularity Is Near , which explains that the rate at which human intelligence develops pales in comparison to that of a machine .
Therefore , Cage proposes that machines may one day have emotions .
Androids were designed with reference to artificial organs , how their energy would be generated , and human eye movement .
An android 's abilities were determined by each of their given profession .
Experts in artificial intelligence were consulted to discern which technological advancements were the most feasible .
Detroit was chosen as the setting to revitalise a city that had succumbed to economic decline after a historical contribution to American industry .
The developers travelled to Detroit to conduct field research , taking pictures , visiting abandoned buildings , and meeting people .
In late 2013 , Cage was in preproduction on Detroit :
Become Human , which he said would build upon his work on Heavy Rain and .
Cage 's script – between 2,000 and 3,000 pages – was first relayed to the design team while programmers created the graphics as well as a new game engine with advancements in features like rendering , dynamic lighting , shading , bokeh , and physical cameras .
Quantic Dream improved their game engine 's depth of field after Mark Cerny , lead architect of the PlayStation 4 , came to evaluate it .
In October 2016 , the screenplay was completed after more than two years .
Writer Adam Williams was hired to help finish and flesh out the story .
Cage used charts and diagrams to see where the choices would end up ; penning " five or six thousand pages of notes " , he likened the story to a Rubik 's Cube .
Two scenes were cancelled for how violence was portrayed .
The casting extended to Los Angeles , London , and Paris in search for more than 250 actors to portray 513 roles .
The actors were scanned in 3D , whose models were then made into characters .
Shooting and animation followed , and on 8 September 2017 , the performance capture was finished after 324 days .
Detroit :
Become Human was worked on by the 180 staff members at Quantic Dream and also outsourced to the Philippines , China , Vietnam , and India .
The game has 35,000 camera shots , 74,000 unique animations , and 5.1 million lines of code .
The characters Connor and Markus are played by Bryan Dechart and Jesse Williams , respectively .
Clancy Brown , Lance Henriksen , and Minka Kelly portray supporting characters Lieutenant Hank Anderson , Carl Manfred , and North , respectively .
There are three different composers , one for each playable character : Philip Sheppard for Kara , Nima Fakhrara for Connor , and John Paesano for Markus .
Sheppard 's cello sequence in Kara 's theme was inspired by the flames of a log fire , whereas the motif layered over it came from the two syllables in her name .
Fakhrara created custom instruments and used vintage synthesizers in order that the sound could represent the robotic nature of Connor .
Paesano 's music was made with the idea that it would be " like a church hymn " , personifying Markus ' transformation into a leader .
Sheppard recorded at Abbey Road Studios with the English Session Orchestra ; Paesano was at Synchron Stage Vienna with the Synchron Stage Orchestra .
Director of photography Aymeric Montouchet used " thick grain and shaky long lens " with shallow depth of field for Kara , " small , tight grain " and a blue palette for Connor , and orange and white colours for Markus .
The game was released to manufacturing on 23 April 2018 , after four years of production .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Detroit :
Become Human was announced on 27 October 2015 at a Sony press conference during Paris Games Week .
It appeared at E3 2016 and E3 2017 , showing trailers of additional playable characters and gameplay .
Following E3 2017 , Cage confirmed that the game would be released in 2018 , later specified as the first or second quarter therein .
The game was released on 25 May 2018 for PlayStation 4 .
If pre - ordered , Detroit : Become Human would come with a dynamic theme and digital soundtrack , while the digital deluxe edition included a copy of Heavy Rain , a digital art book , digital soundtrack , two dynamic themes , and ten avatars .
The soundtrack was available for streaming on 22 June 2018 .
After the 2017 Paris Games Week , a new trailer was criticised for its portrayal of child abuse , specifically a scene in which a 10-year - old girl is attacked by her father .
Dechart defended the trailer , saying the story " elicits empathy " .
A demo of the first scene , " The Hostage " , was made available on the PlayStation Store on 24 April 2018 , accompanied by an Amazon Alexa skill that guides the player through the demo .
The game was promoted in Japan with the live action short film , Tokyo : Become Human .
This was followed by a launch trailer and two animated English - language shorts introducing Elijah Kamski , the creator of the androids , and Chloe , the first android to pass the Turing test .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Detroit :
Become Human received " generally favorable reviews " , according to review aggregator Metacritic .
Destructoids Chris Carter said that , despite tiring of Quantic Dream 's penchant for detective stories , he enjoyed its execution and Connor 's " calm demeanor and android origin " .
Carter praised the setting , calling it " believable " and " captivating " , while also noting that the " smaller moments " were among its strengths .
Michael Goroff of Electronic Gaming Monthly favoured the fact that the playable characters were androids because their second - class citizenship status created an " effective viewpoint " .
The controls and quick - time events were also subject to approval .
Goroff lauded the " incredibly satisfying and sometimes unexpected " impact of the collective decisions and declared this the game 's " biggest accomplishment " .
Writing for Game Informer , Kimberley Wallace agreed with Carter 's assessment of the " little moments " and said the character development was " fun to watch " , well - handled , and the " highlight of the game " .
She appreciated how the branching narratives affected the latter parts and complimented Quantic Dream for the " impressive " achievement .
Paul Tamburro at Game Revolution wrote that Detroit : Become Human boasted a " compelling world ... enriched by fantastic performances and state - of - the - art motion - capturing " .
He commended Curry , Dechart , and Williams for their " engrossing performances " and said the game was among " the most well - acted " around .
He also felt the choices " drastically " changed the story .
Peter Brown of GameSpot welcomed the variety of cycling between characters for ensuring player engagement .
The game 's " most dreadful and horrific scenes " made a considerable impression on Brown , some of which he found to be " truly unforgettable " .
Additionally , he remarked that the visuals were beautiful and " captivating to behold " .
GamesRadar+s Andy Hartup praised Quantic Dream for making " an interactive story capable of provoking genuine , honest , and varied emotions " .
He thought the consequences of the decisions were " utterly delightful " , albeit rarely , and saw the setting as " beautiful " .
Hartup liked the character models , calling them " the most remarkable you 'll see in gaming " , and favoured the eyes in particular .
On the decision - making aspects , he proclaimed Detroit : Become Human " the new gold standard ... for meaningful choice in gaming " .
Lucy O'Brien at IGN wrote that the game " manages to be a frequently moving melodrama that bends to your choices with meaningful results " .
She also praised the acting of Curry , Dechart , and Williams , observing different benefits to each character .
O'Brien appraised the general plot as " big , ambitious fun " and the environments as " beautifully detailed " .
Like Goroff , Wallace , Tamburro , and Hartup , O'Brien found the " branching paths to be multiple and deep " , while also complimenting the flowcharts , a feature Colm Ahern of VideoGamer.com singled out as one of the game 's few redeeming qualities .
Conversely , Carter criticised the game 's " surface level exploration " of the Ship of Theseus , questioning the director 's subtlety .
He blamed the weakness of Kara 's story on Cage 's writing , called the portrayal of domestic and substance abusers " cartoonish " , and complained about occasional " wooden acting " .
Goroff 's only annoyance with the controls concerned its motion - sensitive feature , especially disparaging its use in quick - time events .
Wallace thought Markus ' story was the worst of the three , citing " predictable speeches " and " black - and - white decisions " as the primary problems .
She suggested that the narrative suffered " heavy - handed " attempts at historical parallels , and noted , as Carter did , that its representation of abuse seemed " exploitive due to the over - the - top antics " .
She felt the use of the motion controls and touchpad was " unintuitive " and wanted more variety from the gameplay .
Tamburro faulted the opening act for its " slow " and " dull " interactions , the quick - time events for their abundance , and occasional story paths for being " highly questionable " .
Brown viewed Markus as " remarkably lacking in nuance " and the allegories to actual history as " on - the - nose " and " distracting " .
He commented that the flowchart exposition was " ultimately detrimental " to player immersion and wished there was a way of disabling it .
Hartup disliked the moments in which themes were either " fumble[d ] " or " pushed too far " .
O'Brien observed multiple plotholes and found a considerable amount of " clumsy " exposition and dialogue .
Ahern wrote in his verdict , " Detroit : Become Human wants to move you ...
The thing is , it really does n't ...
when the narrative is as cringey and ham - fisted as it is you wo n't want to play through it multiple times " .
SALES Section::::Sales .
Detroit :
Become Human reached fifth place on the UK chart after two days of release .
In its first week , the game topped both the overall sales and console sales charts .
Though it sold fewer copies than Beyond : Two Souls and Heavy Rain in that region , Cage and executive producer Guillaume de Fondaumière claimed Detroit :
Become Human was the studio 's most successful launch yet .
The NPD Group later confirmed it had a sales growth in excess of twenty percent over Heavy Rain .
It was the third best - selling video game overall , generating the third - most revenue in the US , and sold the most out of any title on the PlayStation Store in May 2018 , having been available for six days .
The game released in Japan with 39,548 units ( which rose to 56,480 after two weeks ) , second to .
In the UK , the second week also saw it become the second best - selling video game ( behind FIFA 18 ) .
The game sold one million copies after the first two weeks .
For the week ending 10 June , its physical sales fell to fourth place in the UK .
Its Japanese sales hit 74,458 copies on 17 June , but dropped from the country 's console chart one week later , when the game was placed ninth on the UK individual formats chart .
Two months after release , a total of 1.5 million people had played the game .
It had sold more than 2 million copies that December .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
In 2017 , Detroit : Become Human won the award for " Best of E3 " at GameSpots Best of E3 Awards , and was nominated for " Best PlayStation 4 Game " and " Best Adventure Game " at IGNs Best of E3 Awards , and for " Adventure Game " at Hardcore Gamers Best of E3 Awards . !
Year ! !
Award ! !
Category ! !
Recipient(s ) and nominee(s ) ! !
Result ! !
Ref NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS