UNLV SCHOOL OF MEDICINE University of Nevada , Las Vegas ( UNLV ) School of Medicine , is an academic division of the University of Nevada , Las Vegas ( UNLV ) with 60 students matriculated on July 17 , 2017 .
The students began their education with a 6 week EMT course .
The school is the first to grant the Doctor of Medicine ( MD ) degree in Southern Nevada .
The school uses facilities in the University Medical Center of Southern Nevada ( UMCSN ) clinical building at the Las Vegas Medical District .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Barbara Atkinson was hired by UNLV as the Planning Dean on May 19 , 2014 .
The school was officially founded on August 22 , 2014 when the Nevada System of Higher Education ( NSHE ) Board of Regents approved a two year budget , and the school submitted its accreditation application to the LCME on September 29 , 2014 .
A joint legislative budget subcommittee approved an initial $ 1.2 million for FY2016 and $ 7.1 million for FY2017 to fund development on May 7 , 2015 .
An additional $ 5.9 million for FY2016 and $ 12.5 million for FY2017 were added from the General Fund upon final adoption of SB514 on June 11 , 2015 .
Barbara Atkinson was promoted from Planning Dean to Founding Dean on November 10 , 2015 .
The LCME transitioned the school from applicant to candidate status on February 11 , 2016 and the school received preliminary accreditation by the LCME on October 18 , 2016 .
In August 2016 , the ACGME approved the transfer to UNLV of all Las Vegas based residencies and fellowships previously associated with the University of Nevada , Reno School of Medicine , effective July 1 , 2017 .
The first White Coat Ceremony will be conducted on August 25 , 2017 .
The Clark County Commission approved a 3 year lease of the University Medical Center of Southern Nevada ( UMCSN ) clinical building at 1524 Pinto Lane , in the Las Vegas Medical District , on September 10 , 2015 .
The Clark County Commission then approved the transfer of 9 acres of land at 625 Shadow Lane to the school on June 21 , 2016 , on which the school plans to build a new 170,000 square feet building for about $ 100 million .
PHILANTHROPY Section::::Philanthropy .
In April 2015 , UNLV committed to paying the entire 4-year medical school tuition for its initial class of 60 students .
A $ 10 million donation from the Engelstad Family Foundation announced in June 2015 exceeded this goal , providing 100 students , 25 in each class over the first 4 years , with full tuition .
Anthony Marlon , a Las Vegas cardiologist and founder of Sierra Health Services , donated $ 2 million in September 2015 to help form the Department of Orthopedic Surgery .
The United Health Foundation donated $ 3 million in April 2016 to develop community clinics and educational programs .
An anonymous donation of $ 25 million matched $ 25 million in new legislative funding , authorized by the Nevada Legislature on June 5 , 2017 .
CURRICULUM
Section::::Curriculum .
UNLV School of Medicine offers medical students a hands - on , community focused curriculum grounded in technology and innovation .
Students are immediately immersed into the medical field with the first phase of the curriculum being a six - week course ending with each student becoming a certified emergency medical technician ( EMT ) .
During the second phase , students will have the opportunity to work in small groups to learn medical Spanish , virtual microscopy and virtual anatomy .
UNLV School of medicine is one of the first medical schools to opt for 3-D touchscreen visuals instead of cadavers .
Along with UNLV School of Medicine 's virtual anatomy , students benefit from a virtual library .
Books , journal articles , videos , and data is available digitally through EZProxy , a cross platform cloud environment which allows students access to the library from anywhere in the world .
Students will receive a full year of outpatient , integrated clerkships .
They will work closely with physicians and nurses in the specialties of : Emergency Medicine , Family Medicine , Internal Medicine .
Obstetrics and Gynecology , Orthopedic Surgery , Otolaryngology , Pediatrics , Psychiatry , and Surgery .
Along with working with healthcare professionals , students will work with UNLV 's William F. Harrah Hotel College of Hotel Administration learning hospitality techniques , offering a new approach to patient care .
In the third phase of the curriculum , students will begin hospital internships , electives and completion of a scholarly project .
In an effort to ease the transition into residency , each student will have an intensive capstone rotation individualized to their field of study .
AFFILIATED HOSPITALS Section::::Affiliated hospitals .
Hospitals that assist in the instruction of medical students , residents , and fellows from the UNLV School of Medicine include University Medical Center of Southern Nevada , Sunrise Hospital & Medical Center , VA Southern Nevada Healthcare System , and the Mike O'Callaghan Federal Hospital .
GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION
Section::::Graduate medical education .
The residencies and fellowships of the UNLV School of Medicine , as of July 1 , 2017 : RESIDENCIES Section::::Residencies . !
Program !
Length !
Accreditation Emergency Medicine 3 years ACGME Family Medicine 3 years
ACGME Family Medicine - Rural 3 years
ACGME General Surgery 5 years
ACGME Internal Medicine 3 years ACGME Obstetrics and Gynecology 4 years
ACGME Orthopedic Surgery 5 years
ACGME Otolaryngology 5 years
ACGME Pediatrics 3 years ACGME Plastic Surgery 6 years
ACGME Psychiatry 4 years ACGME FELLOWSHIPS Section::::Fellowships . !
Program !
Department !
Length !
Accreditation Obstetrics Family Medicine 1 year Sports Medicine Family Medicine
1 year ACGME Urgent Care Fellowship Family Medicine 1 year Colon and Rectal Surgery
General Surgery
1 year
Acute Care Surgery
General Surgery 2 years
ACGME / AAST Cardiovascular Medicine Internal Medicine 3 years
ACGME Gastroenterology and Hepatology Internal Medicine 3 years ACGME Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine Internal Medicine 3 years ACGME Hand and Microsurgery Plastic Surgery 1 year Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
Fellowship Psychiatry 2 years
ACGME Minimally Invasive and Bariatric Surgery General Surgery
1 year REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS