SLASHER ( TV SERIES )
Slasher is a Canadian television horror anthology series created by Aaron Martin .
The first season , retroactively subtitled The Executioner , was produced in association with the Canadian network Super Channel
, Slasher was the first ( and only ) original series by the now - defunct U.S. TV channel Chiller , which premiered the series on Friday , March 4 , 2016 , at 9:00pm EST .
Super Channel aired the show 's Canadian premiere on April 1 , 2016 .
The series ' first season , which centered on a mysterious figure billed as " The Executioner " who terrorizes the fictional town of Waterbury , Canada , was filmed between July and October 2015 in Sudbury , Parry Sound , and Sault Ste .
Marie , Ontario .
On May 1 , 2017 , Slasher began filming a second season in Orangeville , Ontario , Canada .
The licensing rights for the second season were acquired by Netflix .
The season was released as a " Netflix Original " title in various countries on October 17 , 2017 .
The second season titled Slasher : Guilty Party is centered on a group of former summer camp counselors who return to an isolated campground in order to bury their sins of the past , before being targeted , one by one , by an unknown killer .
The series has been renewed for a third season .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
Slasher employs a season - long anthology format , with an overarching mystery storyline that will be resolved upon the season 's conclusion .
Aaron Martin , the series ' creator / producer , acknowledged gaining inspiration for the format from American Horror Story , stating that , should Slasher have subsequent seasons , the AHS style of self - contained storylines would be used along with , ideally , the reliance on as many actors from previous seasons as possible to portray brand new roles .
Martin aims to tell " a modern - day monster story " in Slasher , combining three of his favorite genres : The contemporary murder mystery ( a la Broadchurch ) , the works of Agatha Christie ( one of Martin 's favorite crime writers ) , and the classic slasher films with which he grew up .
In terms of the latter , Martin has specifically cited the influences of Halloween and It Follows in Slashers use of a mysterious singular embodiment that is responsible for a series of killings .
Not wanting to have the show 's killer be " a mythological creature " ( as he feels the killers in most slasher films do not have much mystery surrounding them ) , Martin also uses elements of the traditional whodunit in Slasher : The show 's characters , many of whom have mysterious backgrounds — and their own reasons for possibly being the killer — are featured , explored , and eliminated from consideration , one by one ( either through death or the natural deductive process ) , until the " all too human " killer and his / her motivations are revealed .
PLOT SEASON 1 :
THE EXECUTIONER ( 2016 ) Section::::Plot .
Section::::Season 1 :
The Executioner ( 2016 ) .
Slashers 8-episode first season centers around Sarah Bennett who , with husband Dylan , moves back to the town of her birth , Waterbury ( a fictional town in Canada ) , and into her parents ' former home .
It was in that house on Halloween Night 1988 where both of her parents , Bryan and Rachel , were murdered .
Rachel was pregnant with Sarah at the time of her murder , with police discovering the killer holding Rachel 's newborn baby after the slayings .
Sarah 's return to Waterbury is greeted with the start of a series of copycat murders , all appearing to be at the hands of " The Executioner " .
Seeking insight on her sightings of " The Executioner " and the slayings he or she has committed , Sarah has paid visits to her parents ' imprisoned murderer , Tom Winston .
Tom suggests to Sarah that though most of Waterbury 's residents project a veneer of friendship , innocence , and self - righteousness , many of them harbor dark secrets , including her late parents .
During these conversations , Tom expresses thoughts on what is a common theme of Slashers first season — the seven deadly sins .
Gaining information from Sarah on the victims ' backgrounds and the nature of their deaths , Tom provides suggestions as to what sin the victims may have violated ; Sarah would begin to employ this approach herself without Tom 's assistance in later episodes .
Just as Tom declared himself " the Lord 's messenger " in a 1988 police interrogation video after murdering Sarah 's parents ( seen in Episode 1 ) , he believes in the present day that the new Executioner has become a self - appointed deliverer of " Biblical " punishment towards those he or she believes have committed one of the seven deadly sins in their past , employing methods that are apropos to the individual natures of the deadly sins .
Future victim Alison Sutherland would get The Executioner to admit this in their Episode 5 interview : Alison asks why The Executioner would be as much a sinner as everyone else and violate one of God 's commandments to not kill ; The Executioner counters that God only commanded not to murder the innocent , and that his / her victims are not innocent .
Tom has suggested to Sarah , in Episode 3 , that The Executioner him / herself has committed a deadly sin of their own , being blinded by pride ( " the greatest of sins " ) .
The police chief is found harboring Ariel , a missing teenager that he kidnapped , and a child they had together , in a enclosed locked room in his basement .
Sarah 's grandmother accidentally put her best friend in a coma by dropping a cinder block on her head ( in fact , she was aiming for the girl sitting next to her best friend ; the boy who had gotten Sarah 's grandmother pregnant as a teenager was taking this girl to their high school prom ) .
Bryan and Rachel ( Sarah 's parents ) were cuckolding multiple men and video taping them into service to support them , including Tom Winston .
Tom decided to kill Bryan and Rachel after falling in love with Rachel and being blackmailed , but saved Sarah after Rachel told him Sarah was actually his and not her husband 's .
Eventually , it 's revealed that the deputy Cam is the Executioner , suffering under an abusive mother whom he pushed down the stairs , killing her .
Cam 's father , the town pastor , discovered that Cam was the Executioner , and Cam killed him as well .
After finding her father 's body parts in his home , Sarah kills Cam with a machete . SEASON 2 :
GUILTY PARTY ( 2017 )
Section::::Season 2 :
Guilty Party ( 2017 ) .
Slashers 8-episode second season centers around a horrific secret that a group of former summer camp counselors have buried long ago .
Due to a changing circumstance , they must return to their resort in the dead of winter to retrieve the body of Talvinder , whom they murdered while they were camp counsellors , five years earlier .
They get surprised when they ca n't find the body at the campsite .
Later , the group start dying one by one at the hands of a mysterious person wearing a parka , which also alerts the second group of counselors at the resort .
Eventually , it 's revealed that Judith is the killer , and another character , Wren , is actually Owen " Wren " Turnbull , her son who committed suicide after being framed for Talvinder 's murder , and is a figment of Judith 's imagination .
Owen wrote a letter to his mother , asking her to get justice for him before hanging himself .
Judith killed several members of the commune for their complicity after the fact , as Antoine discovered Talvinder 's body and hid it to avoid jeopardizing a real estate deal .
Dawn and Keira are the only ones to escape her wrath and the former finally turns herself in for her crime during the epilogue .
Judith can be seen watching them along with the hallucination of Owen , who says they 'll be waiting for Dawn after she is released from prison .
CAST AND CHARACTERS SEASON 1 :
THE EXECUTIONER MAIN * Katie McGrath as Sarah Bennett , an art gallery owner who recently moved to Waterbury , her place of birth .
*
Brandon Jay McLaren as Dylan Bennett , Sarah 's husband and editor - in - chief of the local newspaper , the Waterbury Bulletin .
* Steve Byers as Cam Henry , a member of Waterbury 's police force .
* Patrick Garrow as Tom Winston , the original Executioner who murdered Sarah 's parents in 1988 and who advises Sarah on the new Executioner 's murders in the present day .
* Dean McDermott as Iain Vaughn , Waterbury 's police chief .
* Christopher Jacot as Robin Turner , who , after the death of his husband , Justin , must deal with the business mess he left behind .
* Wendy Crewson as Brenda Merrit , Sarah 's maternal grandmother , who returns to Waterbury to look after Sarah and Dylan .
RECURRING / GUEST * Jessica Sipos as June Henry , Cam 's wife , who works as an EMT and shows jealousy over Cam 's relationship to Sarah .
* Mary Walsh as Verna McBride , Sarah and Dylan 's neighbor , who passed judgement almost immediately on the two .
* Enuka Okuma as Lisa Ann Follows , a former criminal justice lawyer , now a New York - based journalist and talk show host .
* Erin Karpluk as Heather Peterson .
She is deeply haunted by and obsessed with her daughter Ariel 's disappearance , which occurred 5 years before the show begins .
Karpluk has equated Heather to the Log Lady , in that much like the Twin Peaks character , Heather appears to have a sixth sense about Waterbury 's residents and their dark secrets .
* Mayko Nguyen as Alison Sutherland , the publisher of the Waterbury Bulletin and Dylan 's boss .
* Rob Stewart as Alan Henry , Cam 's father , a church pastor , and the survivor / witness of Sarah 's parents ' murder .
He has made occasional visits to Tom Winston in prison to provide religious counsel .
* Jefferson Brown as Trent McBride , Verna 's nephew ,
June Henry 's former EMT partner , and an enthusiastic hunter and taxidermist .
* Mark Ghanimé as Justin Faysal , who with husband Robin purchased several properties in Waterbury , including the storefront location that serves as Sarah 's art gallery .
* Dylan Taylor as Bryan Ingram , Sarah 's father * Alysa King as Rachel Ingram , Sarah 's mother * Victoria Snow as Sonja Edwards , Brenda 's former childhood friend and her intended victim in a prom night 1968 incident .
*
Hannah Endicott - Douglas as Ariel Peterson , Heather 's missing daughter * Shawn Ahmed as Sharma , an officer in Waterbury 's police force * Booth Savage as Ronald Edwards , the Mayor of Waterbury
* Susannah Hoffman as Marjorie Travers , a prostitute and drug addict SEASON 2 : GUILTY PARTY MAIN * Leslie Hope as Judith Berry , a commune member , who self - harms whilst recovering from a drug addiction .
* Lovell Adams - Gray as Peter Broome , a former counselor and Andi 's ex - boyfriend .
Five years ago , his affair with Talvinder resulted in his breakup with Andi .
* Jim Watson as Noah Jenkins , a former camp counselor .
Five years ago , Talvinder manipulated him into doing things for her by pretending to like him romantically .
* Christopher Jacot as Antoine , one of the commune leaders , masseuse and yoga instructor .
He is Renee 's legal husband , though he is gay .
* Paulino Nunes as Mark Rankin , a commune member and former lawyer .
He joined the resort after nearly being killed by the father of the victim 's murderer he successfully defended .
* Ty Olsson as Benny Ironside / Glenn Morgan , a commune member and former prisoner .
He joined the resort after killing his former lover and stealing his identity .
* Joanne Vannicola as Renée , one of the commune 's leaders alongside her legal husband Antoine , though she is a lesbian .
* Sebastian Pigott as Owen " Wren " Turnbull , Judith 's son and a former counsler .
He had an unhealthy obsession with Talvinder .
* Madison Cheeatow as Keira , a commune member and former nurse , who joined the resort after accidentally killing a patient .
* Melinda Shankar as Talvinder Gill , a new , manipulative camp counselor five years ago whose murder drives the events of Guilty Party .
She played on the other counselors kindness .
* Kaitlyn Leeb as Susan Lam , a former camp counselor , mother and wife .
Five years ago , she despised Talvinder believing she was not genuine .
* Rebecca Liddiard as Andi Criss , a former camp counselor and Peter 's ex - girlfriend .
Five years ago , Peter had an affair with Talvinder , resulting in their breakup .
* Paula Brancati as Dawn Duguin , a former camp counselor .
Five years ago , she and Talvinder were best friends until she stopped Dawn from having a relationship out of envy .
RECURRING / GUEST * Dean McDermott as Alan Haight , a man whose son died in a hit and run accident .
* Rebecca Amzallag as Stefani , a woman Mark was having an affair with who was killed by the father of the victim 's murderer he successfully defended .
* Jefferson Brown as Gene , the outfitter and supply deliverer for the commune .
* Kyle Buchanan as Simon , Andi 's current boyfriend .
Her guilt about Talvinder 's death causes tension in their relationship .
* Simu Liu as Luke , Susan 's kind and oblivious husband .
* Sophia Walker as Megan , a hiker who arrives to the commune after noting an imminent snowstorm .
* Kimberly - Sue Murray as Janice , Gene 's girlfriend who arrives after his overdue absence .
* Luke Humphrey as Glenn Morgan , a former drug dealer and Benny 's lover .
Benny murdered Glenn after he wanted to leave him , and stole his identity .
* Jon McLaren as Ryan , a former counselor .
He was Dawn 's potent love interest until Talvinder manipulated him into thinking Dawn 's father raped her .
EPISODES
SEASON 1 :
THE EXECUTIONER ( 2016 ) SEASON 2 :
GUILTY PARTY ( 2017 )
DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION Section::::Development and production .
Aaron Martin was inspired to write Slasher after his work on the first season of the medical series Saving Hope , including his writing of two Hope episodes where , in his words , " people got chopped up .
" Martin would write the first episode of Slasher as a spec script , with two intentions for doing so : To offer it to prospective studios , and to show a writing style that was different from his previous work ( e.g. Saving Hope , , Being Erica ) .
Though the script did not receive immediate interest , Shaftesbury Films would discover and option it to prospective broadcasters .
The script would land at Canadian premium network Super Channel , who , their interest piqued in part by Slashers fixed - end format , would order it as a series .
The now - defunct American network Chiller , which specializes in the horror / thriller genre , would join in production sometime after Super Channel ; Slasher would be Chiller 's first ( and only ) foray into original scripted series content .
Production on Slashers 8-episode first season was announced on July 28 , 2015 , with filming taking place between then and October 2015 .
Three Northern Ontario municipalities — the cities of Sudbury and Sault Ste .
Marie and the town of Parry Sound — would stand in for the show 's fictitious location , the town of Waterbury .
A first trailer for the series would be released on November 26 , 2015 .
Unlike most TV series that film their episodes in order , Slasher , under the direction of Craig David Wallace , was shot as if it were a " super - sized " movie : Scenes from multiple episodes were shot at the same time , with the availability of locations and cast being factored in .
The out - of - order schedule allowed the actors to know of their characters ' fates , especially those who had to film their death scenes one day but return later to film earlier scenes as necessary .
As an example of this , Martin cited Mark Ghanimé 's first day on set , when his character , Justin Faysal , was laid out in a casket for a scene early in Slashers third episode ( Justin 's death , which took place in Episode 2 , would be filmed later on ) .
On May 1 , 2017 , Slasher began filming a second season in Orangeville , Ontario , Canada .
Shaftesbury Films confirmed that the series will not be returning to Super Channel or Chiller for a second season .
However , Netflix acquired the rights to the second season .
The second season was released via Netflix on October 17 , 2017 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Slasher has received positive reviews .
Zap2it called the series " a whole lot of fun " and " something for everyone , " praising the series ' anthology nature , its cast of characters , storyline , plot twists , bloody violence , and even the series - within - the - series Falcon Husbandry ( shown as a favorite of Robin and Justin 's in Episode 2 ) .
Bloody Disgusting awarded the show four skulls out of five , praising Katie McGrath as a great " protagonist and possible final girl " and the series ' decision to feature an adult cast , rather than teenagers , with well - developed characters and a " decidedly classic " presentation .
On the occasion of Slashers Super Channel premiere , The Globe and Mails John Doyle , while remarking that it " is no masterpiece of horror , nor was it meant to be , " called the show " very well - crafted , " praising its " exceptional cast " and tight pacing , and noting fans of gory horror will appreciate its bloody scenes .
AWARDS AND ACCOLADES Section::::Awards and accolades . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Nominee(s ) !
Result
Best TV Movie or Limited Series Best Direction in a Dramatic Program or Limited Series
Best Writing in a Dramatic Program or Limited Series Best Performance by an Actor in a Leading Role in a Dramatic Program or Limited Series Steve Byers Best Performance by an Actress in a Featured Supporting Role in a Dramatic Program or Series Wendy Crewson
INTERNATIONAL BROADCAST Section::::International broadcast .
On May 25 , 2016 , the entire first season of Slasher became available to stream instantly on Netflix US .
On October 17 , 2017 , the full second season of Slasher became available to stream on Netflix in various countries .
The second season began airing in the United Kingdom via Pick - TV .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS