GET OUT Get Out is a 2017 American horror film written and directed by Jordan Peele in his directorial debut .
It stars Daniel Kaluuya as a young black man who uncovers a disturbing secret when he meets the family of his white girlfriend .
Allison Williams , Bradley Whitford , Caleb Landry Jones , Stephen Root , Lakeith Stanfield , and Catherine Keener co - star .
Get Out premiered at the Sundance Film Festival on January 23 , 2017 , and was theatrically released in the United States on February 24 , 2017 , by Universal Pictures .
It grossed $ 255 million worldwide on a $ 4.5 million budget , with a net profit of $ 124 million , making it the tenth most profitable film of 2017 .
Critics praised the screenplay , direction , acting , and satirical themes .
The film was chosen by the National Board of Review , the American Film Institute and Time as one of the top 10 films of the year .
At the 90th Academy Awards , it was nominated for four awards , including Best Picture , winning the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay .
It also earned five nominations at the 23rd Critics ' Choice Awards , two at the 75th Golden Globe Awards , and two at the 71st British Academy Film Awards .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Black photographer Chris Washington reluctantly agrees to meet the family of his white girlfriend , Rose Armitage .
During their drive to the family 's countryside estate , they hit a deer .
Though Chris was not driving , the white policeman asks for Chris ' identification ; Rose intervenes and the incident goes unrecorded .
At the house , Rose 's brother Jeremy and their parents , neurosurgeon Dean and hypnotherapist Missy , make discomfiting comments about black people .
Chris witnesses strange behavior from the estate 's black workers :
housekeeper Georgina and groundskeeper Walter .
Unable to sleep , Chris goes outside to smoke and sees Walter sprinting over the grounds while Georgina prowls through the house .
Missy pressures Chris into a hypnotherapy session to cure his smoking addiction .
In a trance , he recounts the death of his mother in a hit - and - run when he was a child , expresses guilt , and sinks into a void Missy calls the " sunken place " .
The next day Georgina unplugs his phone , draining his battery , though she claims it was an accident .
Dozens of wealthy white people arrive for the Armitages ' annual get - together .
They express admiration for Chris 's physique and for black figures such as Tiger Woods .
Jim Hudson , a blind art dealer , takes particular interest in Chris 's photography skills .
Chris meets another black man , Logan King , who acts strangely and is married to a much older white woman .
Chris calls his friend , TSA agent Rod Williams , about the strange behavior at the house .
Chris tries to inconspicuously photograph Logan with his phone , but when his flash goes off accidentally , Logan becomes hysterical , yelling at Chris to " get out .
"
The others restrain him and Dean claims Logan had an epileptic seizure .
Away from the house , Chris convinces Rose that they should leave .
Meanwhile , Dean holds an auction with a photo of Chris , which Hudson wins .
Chris sends the photo of Logan to Rod ; Rod recognizes Logan as Andre Hayworth , who has been missing for months .
Suspecting a conspiracy , Rod goes to the police , but they deride him .
While Chris packs to leave , he finds photos of Rose in prior relationships with black men , contradicting her claim that Chris is her first black boyfriend .
The collection also includes pictures of Rose with Walter and Georgina .
He tries to leave the house , but the Armitage family , including Rose , blocks him .
He attacks Jeremy , but Missy hypnotizes him .
Chris awakens strapped to a chair in the basement .
A video presentation featuring Rose 's grandfather Roman explains that the family transplants the brains of white people into black bodies ; the consciousness of the host remains in the sunken place , conscious but powerless .
Hudson tells Chris he wants his body so he can gain Chris 's sight and artistic talents .
Chris plugs his ears with cotton stuffing pulled from the chair padding , obstructing the hypnosis .
When Jeremy comes to fetch him for the surgery , Chris knocks him out .
He then impales Dean on the antlers of a deer mount .
Dying , Dean stumbles and knocks over a candle which sets fire to the operating room with Hudson inside .
After killing Missy and Jeremy as well , Chris drives away in Jeremy 's car , but hits Georgina .
Remembering his mother 's death , he carries Georgina into the car , not realizing she is possessed by Rose 's grandmother Marianne .
She attacks him and he crashes , killing her .
Rose apprehends him with Walter , who is possessed by Roman .
Chris uses the flash on his phone to expel Roman from Walter 's body .
Walter takes Rose 's rifle , shoots her in the stomach , and then shoots himself .
Chris begins to strangle Rose , but stops .
Rod arrives in an airport police car and rescues Chris , leaving Rose on the road .
CAST * Daniel Kaluuya as Chris Washington * Zailand Adams as 11-year - old
Chris
* Allison Williams as Rose Armitage * Catherine Keener as Missy Armitage * Bradley Whitford as Dean Armitage * Caleb Landry Jones as Jeremy Armitage * Stephen Root as Jim Hudson * Lakeith Stanfield as Andre Hayworth / Logan King * Lil Rel Howery as Rod Williams * Erika Alexander as Detective Latoya
* Marcus Henderson as Walter / Roman Armitage
* Betty Gabriel as Georgina / Marianne Armitage * Richard Herd as Roman Armitage Writer - director Jordan Peele voices the sounds made by the wounded deer , and narrates a UNCF commercial .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Get Out is the directorial debut of Jordan Peele , who had previously worked in comedy , including the sketch
show Key & Peele .
He felt the horror and comedy genres are similar in that " so much of it is pacing , so much of it [ hinges on ] reveals " , and that comedy gave him " something of a training " for the film .
The Stepford Wives ( 1975 ) provided inspiration , about which Peele said , " it 's a horror movie but has a satirical premise . "
As the film deals with racism , Peele has stated that the story is " very personal " , although he noted that " it quickly veers off from anything autobiographical . "
Peele was introduced to producer Sean McKittrick by comedy partner Keegan - Michael Key in 2013 .
" I was shooting a movie with Keegan - Michael Key .
He said , ' You got ta meet Jordan , he 's a horror fanatic and he has all these ideas . '
Jordan and I met for coffee in New Orleans .
He said , ' Here 's one you 'll never want to make , ' and he pitched me the whole story .
I 'd never seen that movie before .
It fascinated me .
So I said right at the table , ' Okay , I 'm going to buy this pitch and pay you to write it . '
I think he was a little shocked . "
Peele wrote the first draft of the script in two months .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
The lead actors , Daniel Kaluuya and Allison Williams , were cast in November 2015 , with other roles cast between December 2015 and February 2016 .
Kaluuya was cast based on the strength of his performance in Black Mirror episode " Fifteen Million Merits " .
" That party sequence is why I really wanted to do this film , because I 've been to that party , " Kaluuya told The Los Angeles Times . "
He [ Chris ] feels like an everyman .
He 's kind of like J. Cole .
Chris is that guy that everyone knows , who has been in everyone 's class at school .
That good guy from around the area . "
Williams said she was cast by Peele as a sneaky gambit to disorient audiences .
"
Jordan told me that he had always pictured me as Rose because Peter Pan or Marnie would make it easier for people to trust me , " Williams noted .
" I was looking for a role that would weaponize everything that people take for granted about me .
So I instantly signed on to it .
"
Williams observed that white audiences frequently misinterpret the motivations of her character Rose .
" They 'd ' say she was hypnotized , right ? '
And I 'm like , no !
She 's just evil !
How hard is that to accept ?
She 's bad !
We gave you so many ways to know that she 's bad !
She has photos of people whose lives she ended behind her !
The minute she can , she hangs them back up on the wall behind her .
That 's so crazy !
And they 're still like , '
but maybe she 's also a victim ? '
And I 'm like , NO !
No !
And I will say , that is one hundred percent white people who say that to me .
"
The scene where Rose drinks milk while looking at potential future victims was conceived shortly before shooting to add an additional creepy element to her character .
The music used in the scene , " ( I 've Had )
The Time of My Life , " was intended to reflect Rose 's emotional detachment .
" There 's something kind of horrific about milk , " Peele said .
" Think about it !
Think about what we 're doing .
Milk is kind of gross . "
FILMING Section::::Filming .
Principal photography began on February 16 , 2016 .
Shooting took place in Fairhope , Alabama , for three weeks , followed by Barton Academy and in the Ashland Place Historic District in midtown Mobile , Alabama .
Principal photography ended in 23 days .
Lil Rel Howery says the allegorical symbolism in the film is strongly entrenched in the fear historically experienced by African Americans .
" It goes back to the way I grew up ; I 'm just being honest , " Howery explained .
" Segregation created this .
Stories about people like Emmett Till .
It 's history ; crazy things have happened , so people are going to embellish and pass that onto their kids as a warning .
Jordan was so smart to hit on all these stories that could be considered myths , but a lot of it is rooted in truth . "
Peele was worried about the film 's chances of success , telling the Los Angeles Times , " What if white people do n't want to come see the movie because they 're afraid of being villainized with black people in the crowd ?
What if black people do n't want to see the movie because they do n't want to sit next to a white person while a black person is being victimized on - screen ? "
ALTERNATIVE ENDINGS Section::::Alternative endings .
In the original ending , Chris is arrested by the police while trying to strangle Rose .
Instead of rescuing Chris , Rod meets him in jail and asks him for information about the Armitage family to investigate , but Chris insists that he stopped them and everything is fine .
Peele intended this ending to reflect the realities of racism .
By the time production had begun , however , several high - profile police shootings of black people had made discussion , in Peele 's words , " more woke " .
After gauging reception at test screenings , he decided the film needed a happy ending , and that having a moment when the audience believes Chris is about to be arrested would preserve the intended reaction .
Peele considered several other endings , some of which are included on the DVD and Blu - ray release .
In one ending , Rod breaks into the estate , finds Chris , and calls his name , but Chris responds , " I assure you , I do n't know who you 're talking about . " SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
Michael Abels composed the film 's score , which Peele wanted to have " distinctly black voices and black musical references .
" This proved to be a challenge , as Peele found that African - American music typically has what he termed " at the very least , a glimmer of hope to it . " At the same time , Peele also wanted to avoid having a voodoo motif .
The final score features Swahili voices as well as a blues influence . "
Sikiliza Kwa Wahenga " is a Swahili phrase that translates to " listen to ( your ) ancestors , " which indicates to the listener , " something bad is coming .
Run . "
" The words are issuing a warning to Chris , " Peele said .
" The whole idea of the movie is ' Get out ! '
— it 's what we 're screaming at the character on - screen . "
The song " Redbone " by Childish Gambino appears at the movie 's beginning .
Other songs in the film include " Run Rabbit Run " by Flanagan and Allen and " ( I 've Had )
The Time of My Life " by Bill Medley and Jennifer Warnes .
THEMES Section::::Themes .
The Guardian wrote , " The thing Get Out does so well – and the thing that will rankle with some viewers – is to show how , however unintentionally , these same people can make life so hard and uncomfortable for black people .
It exposes a liberal ignorance and hubris that has been allowed to fester .
It 's an attitude , an arrogance which in the film leads to a horrific final solution , but in reality , leads to a complacency that is just as dangerous . "
Peele said about the film , " The real thing at hand here is slavery ...
It 's some dark shit . "
The film also depicts the lack of attention on missing black Americans compared to missing white females .
Slates Damon Young stated the film 's premise was " depressingly plausible ...
Although black people only comprise 13 percent of America 's population , they are 34 percent of America 's missing , a reality that exists as the result of a mélange of racial and socioeconomic factors rendering black lives demonstratively less valuable than the lives [ of ] our white counterparts . "
Peele wrote Rose as a subversion of the white savior trope , and in particular films where most white characters are evil but one is good .
Peele and Williams stated that Rose behaved like a teenager as her emotional development was delayed .
Williams believed that Rose was not a victim of indoctrination , hypnotism or Stockholm syndrome , but simply evil .
After Rose 's intentions are revealed , her previous " soft and welcoming " appearance becomes a " vision of cold , meticulous elitism " , with hunting jodhpurs , a white dress shirt , and a " sleek ponytail " ; she hangs photographs of her ex - partners on her wall like hunting trophies .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Get Out grossed $ 176 million in the United States and Canada and $ 79.4 million in other territories for a worldwide gross of $ 255.5 million , against a production budget of $ 4.5 million .
Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit of the film to be $ 124.8 million , when factoring together all expenses and revenues , making it the 10th most profitable release of 2017 .
Vulture described Get Outs 5.3 multiple as " staggering " .
In North America , Get Out was released on February 24 , 2017 , alongside Collide and Rock Dog , and was expected to gross $ 20–25 million from 2,773 theaters in its opening weekend .
The film made $ 1.8 million from Thursday night previews and $ 10.8 million on its first day .
It went on to open for $ 33.4 million , finishing first at the box office .
Thirty - eight percent of the film 's opening - weekend audience was African American , while 35 % was white , with Georgia being its most profitable market .
In its second weekend , the film finished in second at the box office behind new release Logan ( $ 88.4 million ) , grossing $ 28.3 million , for a drop of 15.4 % .
Horror films tend to drop at least 60 % in their second weekend , so this was above average .
In its third weekend , the film grossed $ 21.1 million , dropping just 25 % from its previous week , and finished third at the box office behind newcomer and Logan .
In March 2017 , three weeks after its release , Get Out crossed the $ 100 million mark domestically , making Peele the first black writer - director to do so with his debut movie .
On April 8 , 2017 , the film became the highest - grossing film domestically directed by a black filmmaker , beating out F. Gary Gray 's Straight Outta Compton , which grossed $ 162.8 million domestically in 2015 .
Gray reclaimed the record two weeks later when The Fate of the Furious grossed $ 173.3 million on its fourteenth day of release on April 27 .
Domestically , Get Out is also the highest - grossing debut film based on an original screenplay in Hollywood history , beating the two - decade - long record of 1999 's The Blair Witch Project ( $ 140.5 million ) .
By the end of March , Los Angeles Times had declared the film 's success a " cultural phenomenon " noting that in addition to its box office success , " moviegoers have shared countless ' sunken place ' Internet memes and other Get Out - inspired fan art across social media . "
Josh Rottenberg , the editor of the piece , attributed the film 's success to the fact that it was released " at one of the most politically charged moments in memory . "
CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 99 % based on 335 reviews , and an average rating of 8.3/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Funny , scary , and thought - provoking , Get Out seamlessly weaves its trenchant social critiques into a brilliantly effective and entertaining horror / comedy thrill ride .
" It is one of ten films to earn a 99 % ( six other films ) or 100 % ( three films ) rating with 100 or more reviews ( it held a 100 % approval rating after the first 139 reviews on the site were registered ) .
It was also the highest rated wide release of 2017 on the site .
On Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating to reviews , the film has an average weighted score of 84 out of 100 , based on 48 critics , indicating " universal acclaim " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A – " on an A+ to F scale , while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave an 84 % overall positive score and a 66 % " definite recommend " .
Richard Roeper gave the film 3 stars , saying : " the real star of the film is writer - director Jordan Peele , who has created a work that addresses the myriad levels of racism , pays homage to some great horror films , carves out its own creative path , has a distinctive visual style — and is flat - out funny as well . "
Keith Phipps of Uproxx praised the cast and Peele 's direction , saying , " That he brings the technical skill of a practiced horror master is more of a surprise .
The final thrill of Get Out — beyond the slow - building sense of danger , the unsettling atmosphere , and the twisty revelation of what 's really going on — is that Peele 's just getting started . "
Mike Rougeau of IGN gave the film 9/10 , and wrote , " Get Outs whole journey , through every tense conversation , A - plus punchline and shocking act of violence , feels totally earned .
And the conclusion is worth each uncomfortable chuckle and moment of doubt . "
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave Get Out 3.5/4 , and called it a " jolt - a - minute horrorshow laced with racial tension and stinging satirical wit . "
Scott Mendelson of Forbes said the film captured the zeitgeist and called it a " modern American horror classic . "
Conversely , film critic Armond White of the conservative magazine National Review gave a negative review , referring to the film as a " Get - Whitey movie " and stating that it " [ reduces ] racial politics to trite horror - comedy ...
it 's an Obama movie for Tarantino fans .
"
New York Observer critic Rex Reed included the film on his list of 10 Worst Films of 2017 , and later stated in a CBS Sunday Morning interview , " I did n't care if all the black men are turned into robots . "
A writer on Sunday Mornings website noted that Reed appeared mistaken on what the film was about , something that Reed has also been accused of over other films .
Despite the film 's wide critical acclaim , Get Out divided Oscar voters , with many older members of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences either dismissing the film or choosing not to see it .
According to Vulture , new voting members said they ran into " interference " from more senior members of the Academy when it came to evaluating the film as Best Picture .
" I had multiple conversations with longtime Academy members who were like , ' That was not an Oscar film , ' " according to a new voter . "
And I 'm like , ' That 's bullshit .
Watch it . '
Honestly , a few of them had not even seen it
and they were saying it ,
so dispelling that kind of thing has been super important . "
One anonymous Oscar voter told The Hollywood Reporter that the film 's Oscar campaign turned them off . "
[ W]hat bothered me ...
was that instead of focusing on the fact that this was an entertaining little horror movie that made quite a bit of money , they started trying to suggest it had deeper meaning than it does , and , as far as I 'm concerned , they played the race card , and that really turned me off .
In fact , at one of the luncheons , the lead actor [ Daniel Kaluuya ] , who is not from the United States [ he 's British ] , was giving us a lecture on racism in America and how black lives matter , and I thought , ' What does this have to do with Get Out ?
They 're trying to make me think that if I do n't vote for this movie , I 'm a racist . '
I was really offended .
That sealed it for me . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
At the 90th Academy Awards , the film earned four nominations :
Best Picture , Best Director , Best Original Screenplay , and Best Actor for Daniel Kaluuya .
Peele became the third person ( after Warren Beatty and James L. Brooks ) to earn Best Picture , Director and Screenplay nominations for a debut film , and the first black winner for Best Original Screenplay ( and fourth overall nominated , after John Singleton , Spike Lee , and Suzanne de Passe ) .
At the 75th Golden Globe Awards , Get Out received two nominations : Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy and Best Actor – Comedy or Musical for Daniel Kaluuya .
The submission in the comedy category prompted debate about the premise of the film .
Although advertised as a " satirical horror film , " Universal Pictures submitted it as a comedy because of less competition in the category , which gave the film a greater chance of receiving accolades .
Peele joked in a tweet , " ' Get Out ' is a documentary , " but it was reported he approved of the submission .
The film also received nominations at the 24th Screen Actors Guild Awards , 49th NAACP Image Awards , and 23rd Critics ' Choice Awards , among others .
It won Best Foreign International Film at the British Independent Film Awards .
At the 33rd Independent Spirit Awards on March 3 , 2018 , Jordan Peele won the Best Director Award and the film won Best Picture .
POSSIBLE SEQUEL
Section::::Possible sequel .
In an interview with website The Playlist , Peele stated that he has ideas for a sequel and was open to making one .
SEE ALSO
* Short Night of Glass Dolls ( 1971 )
*
The Stepford Wives ( 1975 )
* Society
* Rosemary 's Baby
*
Guess
Who 's Coming to Dinner
*
The Skeleton Key * The Thing on the Doorstep
* Teddy Perkins
* Being John Malkovich * List of black films of the 2010s REFERENCES FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS