FINN ( STAR WARS ) FN-2187 ( Finn ) is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise .
He first appeared in the 2015 film in which he is a stormtrooper for the First Order who flees and turns against it after being shocked by their cruelty in his first combat mission .
He is portrayed by English actor John Boyega , who reprises the role in .
CASTING AND CREATION Section::::Casting and creation .
The idea for the character Finn came from Star Wars screenwriter Lawrence Kasdan .
Colleague Michael Arndt , who had prepared an early draft of The Force Awakens , revealed : And then we were struggling to figure out who the male lead was going to be .
I remember we talked about pirates and merchant marines and all this stuff , and finally Larry [ Kasdan ] got pissed at all of us
and he 's just like , "
You guys , you 're not thinking big .
What if he 's a stormtrooper that ran away ?
For the roles of Finn and other new Star Wars characters for The Force Awakens , director J. J. Abrams intentionally looked for unknown actors , as he wanted audiences " to meet these characters [ in the film ] and not feel like it 's him from that thing , it 's her from that thing .
" Boyega , who had impressed Abrams in his debut role in British sci - fi film Attack the Block ( 2011 ) , was invited to audition for the role of Finn , a process which lasted seven months before he was finally cast .
Kathleen Kennedy , one of the producers of The Force Awakens , stated : John Boyega was somebody we 'd known of because of Attack the Block .
And we 'd been sort of putting him on the top of our list right from the beginning .
But , then again , we went on a massive search just to see who was out there , and we kept coming back to realizing that John would be the perfect Finn .
Finn 's stormtrooper code name , FN-2187 , is a reference to the number of the cell in which Princess Leia was detained in the original 1977 film Star Wars .
"
Cell 2187 , " in turn , references Arthur Lipsett 's short film 21 - 87 , which reportedly inspired George Lucas to make the film THX 1138 .
Abrams stated that it was intentional that Finn was given no last name in promotional materials for The Force Awakens , suggesting that his full name and background would be revealed in future films .
However , the film itself revealed that " Finn " is an adopted name , derived from his stormtrooper number .
APPEARANCES
THE FORCE AWAKENS Section::::Appearances .
Section::::The Force Awakens .
Finn , originally designated " FN-2187 " , is an ex - First Order stormtrooper who served under Captain Phasma and Kylo Ren .
He was taken from his family at a young age and sold to the First Order to become a part of their ever - expanding army .
He was trained for most his life to be an effective , loyal , and merciless soldier .
In spite of his training , Finn becomes disillusioned with the First Order during his first combat mission on the planet Jakku .
He is traumatized when a fellow stormtrooper dies in front of him , and is later horrified when Kylo Ren , having failed to secure the map that will lead to the missing Luke Skywalker , orders his squadron to massacre a village of Jakku civilians .
The other stormtroopers follow Kylo Ren 's order without hesitation .
Finn , however , lowers his weapon , aghast , in a silent but firm refusal .
While on Jakku , Phasma and Ren both notice Finn 's inability to kill , and Phasma later instructs him to report for reconditioning to better follow her orders .
Instead of heeding her word , Finn resolves to flee the First Order , and convinces the captured Resistance pilot Poe Dameron to aid him in his escape .
With Poe piloting a stolen TIE fighter , the two escape from aboard the Finalizer — the Resurgent - class Star Destroyer where Poe was being held prisoner .
While piloting , Poe dubs FN-2187 " Finn " ( from the " FN " in his designation ) , which the otherwise nameless stormtrooper embraces .
Moments after , their TIE fighter is shot down by The Finalizer 's turrets and crash - lands back on Jakku .
When Finn comes to , he searches for Poe in the wreckage , but is only able to find the pilot 's iconic red - and - tan jacket before the shattered hull of their ship is swallowed by an enormous sinkhole .
Finn assumes that Poe is dead .
Alone , Finn decides to search for civilization , and dons Poe 's jacket in place of his own stormtrooper armor .
Poe 's astromech droid BB-8 , now in the care of the junk scavenger Rey , recognizes the jacket that Finn is wearing belongs to Poe .
Rey assumes Finn to be a member of the Resistance after mentioning that BB-8 has a partially completed map leading to the Jedi Master Luke Skywalker .
Finn goes along with her mistaken assumption , hoping that she will help him get BB-8 to the Resistance .
The three of them escape the First Order on the Millennium Falcon with help from Han Solo and Chewbacca .
Han takes them to his friend Maz Kanata on Takodana , who promises to take them to the Resistance .
Finn decides to continue to flee the galactic conflict , but changes his mind when the First Order launches a preemptive strike on the New Republic and Ren 's forces find them and take Rey prisoner .
Finn flies to the Resistance base , where he discovers that Poe is still alive and meets General Leia Organa , C-3PO , and the hibernating R2-D2 .
Finn reveals some details about the First Order 's planet - converted superweapon , Starkiller Base , and claims to be able to disable their shields .
When he arrives on the planet with Han and Chewbacca , however , Finn reveals that he only worked in the base 's sanitation section .
Nevertheless , the team takes Phasma hostage and Finn forces her at gunpoint to disable the shields .
This allows the Resistance to attack , led by Poe .
They meet up with Rey , who has freed herself from captivity .
Han confronts and is killed by Ren , but the remainder of the team continues on to escape .
Ren confronts Finn and Rey in the woods , claiming that their fight is not over .
Finn picks up Luke and Anakin Skywalker 's old lightsaber after Rey is knocked out by Ren and tries to fight him , with Ren simply toying with him until Finn manages to score a hit on Ren 's shoulder making him drop the game and easily best and seriously wound Finn within seconds .
Rey then takes the lightsaber and defeats Ren after consciously deciding to use The Force inside of her for the first time .
Rey and Chewbacca escape Starkiller Base in the Millennium Falcon and bring Finn , still unconscious , to the Resistance base for medical care .
RELATED WORKS AND MERCHANDISING Section::::Related works and merchandising .
Finn is featured in ( 2015 ) by Greg Rucka , an anthology book for young readers that focuses on the lives of Poe , Rey and Finn before the events of The Force Awakens .
Finn is also a point of view character in the of The Force Awakens by Alan Dean Foster .
Finn is a playable character in Disney Infinity 3.0 , voiced by Boyega .
THE LAST JEDI Section::::The
Last Jedi .
Finn awakens from his coma aboard the main Resistance cruiser , and immediately demands to know where Rey is , learning that Leia has a beacon that will lead Rey back to her when necessary .
Later , following the attack on the cruiser which killed most of the Resistance 's main leadership and rendered Leia unconscious , Finn takes the beacon and attempts to board an escape pod in the hopes of keeping both himself and Rey out of danger .
Before he can board the pod , he is found by Rose Tico , a maintenance worker whose sister Paige , a bomber for the Resistance , has recently died in an attack on the First Order .
Seeing Finn trying to escape , Rose stuns him and intends to turn him in for desertion , but stops when Finn tells her that the First Order has found a way to track the cruiser through lightspeed .
She tells Finn that she might be able to disable the tracker , and Finn says that , having worked aboard a Star Destroyer , he would be able to find where the tracker is .
Rose and Finn run their plan by Poe , who contacts Maz Kanata for help , but she claims that she is too busy and instructs them to find a " master code breaker " on a casino on the planet Canto Bight .
Operating against Vice Admiral Holdo 's wishes , Finn and Rose , along with BB-8 , steal a ship and go to Canto Bight .
Finn is initially entranced by the lavish lifestyle of the casino , but becomes disillusioned when Rose tells him that most of the people there have become wealthy by dealing arms to the First Order .
While they find the master code breaker , they are unable to recruit him as they are arrested and jailed for a parking violation .
In their cell they meet DJ , an otherwise unnamed thief and codebreaker who offers to help them ; they refuse , but he nonetheless breaks them out of their cell .
Finn and Rose escape from the prison where they set free a horde of horse - like racing creatures called Fathiers , escaping atop one of them .
Outside the casino they are greeted by BB-8 and DJ , having stolen a ship together .
DJ agrees to help them , and while Finn is untrusting of his shady nature , DJ tried to insist to Finn that there is n't such thing as " good guys " and " bad guys " in a war .
Eventually , Finn , Rose , and DJ arrive aboard the main Star Destroyer and disguise themselves as First Order officers ; Finn finds the location of the tracker and DJ breaks them in , but before Rose is able to disable the tracker they are caught by Captain Phasma .
DJ , having overheard the Resistance 's plan of escaping to Crait via transports , secretly tells the First Order of the plans in exchange for money and a ship , and Finn and Rose are to be executed .
Before they are , Holdo rams the Resistance cruiser into the Star Destroyer at lightspeed , damaging the ship and sending it into chaos .
Finn has a one - on - one fight with Phasma , ending with him proudly declaring himself " rebel scum " before Phasma falls to her demise .
BB-8 , aboard an AT - ST walker , rescues Finn and Rose from Stormtroopers and the three of them very narrowly escape to Crait aboard a damaged shuttle .
As the First Order prepares an attack on the formerly abandoned Rebel base on Crait , Finn recognizes the weaponry that they plan to use to destroy the blast doors and leads a small strike on the First Order with the intention of disabling the cannon .
The attack goes poorly , and Poe orders all fighters to retreat , but Finn is determined to destroy the cannon and flies directly into the blast , planning to sacrifice himself to defeat the First Order .
At the last second , Rose stops him by ramming her speeder into his , pushing him out of the blast .
Finn asks her why she stopped him , and she tells him that wars are won " not by fighting what we hate , but saving what we love ; " she then kisses him before falling unconscious .
Finn brings her body back to the Rebel base and summons a medic for her .
When Luke Skywalker presents himself on Crait , Finn 's first instinct is to send forces to help him , but Poe realizes that Luke is stalling to give the Resistance time to escape from Crait .
Finn and Poe lead the Resistance off the planet , and Finn finally reunites with Rey , passionately embracing her before boarding the Millennium Falcon .
Finn is last seen putting a blanket over the still unconscious Rose .
RELATED WORKS AND MERCHANDISING Section::::Related works and merchandising .
Finn is a playable Hero in Star Wars Battlefront II , voiced by Boyega .
He was added through the DLC of The Last Jedi .
EPISODE IX Section::::Episode IX .
Finn will return once more in , with John Boyega reprising the role again .
CHARACTER Section::::Character .
When asked about Finn 's character traits , Boyega replied , I think the element of having to step up to a bigger calling , when your circumstances do n't particularly reflect that .
Because I 'm young , at the beginning of my life ; you have n't really achieved much , and then you have to do that whole adulthood thing , get responsible , work and all of that stuff , no more mommy and daddy taking care of things .
I feel like it 's the same kind of journey that Finn has when he leaves the First Order .
He leaves a curriculum , he leaves a system and embarks on his own journey .
He also noted that initially " most of his decisions are based on adrenaline .
Like , ' Okay , you know what ?
I 'm just going to get this blaster and run away . '
" Boyega further noted that " [ n]ot only is the character in over his head and someone who is just dropped into an extraordinary circumstance , the scenes and the script prove that
and it 's not a problem that can just be erased . "
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The character and Boyega 's portrayal were praised ; reviewer Jamie Graham wrote , " of the new triangle of characters , Boyega brings intensity and surprisingly honed comic timing . "
Reviewers also praised Finn 's relationships with the other characters : The dynamic between Rey and Finn is something new for Star Wars , with her bright - eyed heroism complementing Boyega 's roguish wit ...
Gone is the clunky dialogue of the prequels — instead , it 's replaced by some seriously clever writing that often leads to nice little moments , many with Han and Finn .
Drew McWeeny of HitFix notes , " Boyega has this great combination of self - interested fear and reluctant heroism that he plays beautifully , and he charts Finn 's evolution as a person expertly here . "
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone described the character as " bracingly comic and cunning " .
Robbie Collin writes that Boyega has a " ( very funny ) half - brave , half - anxious , would - be - heroic schtick " and notes that despite being " brave , charming , and funny " , Finn " only wants to be thought of as the daring freedom - fighter
he 's not quite sure he 's cut out to be .
" Some reviewers were less than positive , however .
Ty Burr of The Boston Globe wrote that " Boyega 's Finn is the new movie 's one weak link , a character who vacillates between noble impulses and cowardice until our interest drops away .
The performance is fine but it 's just fine , with little of the iconic bite a Wagnerian cartoon like this needs . "
The character was also subject to racist reactions by some fans online , to which Boyega responded , " I 'm not going to lose sleep over people . "
After the first trailer premiered , Boyega responded to critics with , " To whom it may concern ...
Get used to it " , and further commented that , " All the films I 've done have had a secret commentary on stereotypical mentalities .
It 's about getting people to drop a prejudiced state of mind and realise , ' Oh shit we 're just watching normal people . '
" In response to those who desired to boycott the film over their disagreements with the existence of a black stormtrooper , Boyega replied , " I 'm proud of my heritage , and no man can take that away from me .
I was n't raised to fear people with a difference of opinion .
They are merely victims of a disease in their mind . "
In 2016 , Boyega was nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Actor for his portrayal of Finn .
SEE ALSO * 21 - 87 , a short film that influenced George Lucas and is referenced in several of his films .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Finn on IMDb