LIST OF HOLLYOAKS CHARACTERS ( 2016 )
Hollyoaks is a British television soap opera that was first broadcast on 23 October 1995 .
The following is a list of characters that appeared in the serial in 2016 , by order of first appearance .
All characters were introduced by executive producer , Bryan Kirkwood .
The first character to be introduced was James Nightingale ( Gregory Finnegan ) , a mysterious solicitor who begins manipulating Cindy Cunningham ( Stephanie Waring ) and is later revealed to be the eldest Nightingale sibling , while February saw the arrival of Marnie Nightingale ( Lysette Anthony ) , the Nightingale family matriarch .
Liam Donovan ( Maxim Baldry ) , Jesse Donovan ( Luke Jerdy ) , and Adam Donovan ( Jimmy Essex ) , the half - brothers of Grace Black ( Tamara Wall ) were introduced in March and April , with Lisa Loveday ( Rachel Adedeji ) , the missing daughter of Simone Loveday ( Jacqueline Boatswain ) and Louis Loveday ( Karl Collins ) , making her first appearance in late April .
D.S. Armstrong ( Andrew Hayden - Smith ) , a police officer , debuted in June .
August saw the first appearance of Maria ( Fernanda Diniz ) , the former wife of Diego Salvador Martinez Hernandez De La Cruz ( Juan Pablo Yepez ) , Ryan Knight ( Duncan James ) , the fiancée of Amy Barnes ( Ashley Slanina - Davies ) , and Courtney Campbell ( Amy Conachan ) , the cousin of Cameron Campbell ( Cameron Moore ) .
Tracey Donovan ( Lisa Maxwell ) , the mother of Grace , Liam , Jesse and Adam , joined the recurring cast in September , while Juanita Salvador Martinez Hernandez De La Cruz ( Jacey Sallés ) , the mother of Diego , and Billy Brodie ( Clive Russell ) , the estranged brother of Jack Osborne ( Jimmy McKenna ) , were introduced for guest appearances .
Nick Savage , the nephew of Dirk Savage ( David Kennedy ) , and Eva Falco ( Kerry Bennett ) , the estranged niece of Jack , made their first appearances as regular characters in September .
The McQueen family were expanded in November with the arrivals of Goldie McQueen ( Chelsee Healey ) , Prince McQueen ( Malique Thompson - Dwyer ) and Hunter McQueen ( Theo Graham ) .
Marnie 's mother Tabitha Maxwell - Brown ( Linda Gray ) was introduced in November , while Dr. Barton ( Amanda Muggleton ) , a doctor treating Nancy Osborne ( Jessica Fox ) , appeared in December .
JAMES NIGHTINGALE
Section::::James Nightingale .
James Nightingale , played by Gregory Finnegan , made his first screen appearance on 12 January 2016 .
He is the eldest son of Mac ( David Easter ) and Marnie Nightingale ( Lysette Anthony ) .
He is an older brother to Nathan ( Jared Garfield ) , Ellie ( Sophie Porley ) , and Alfie Nightingale ( Richard Linnell ) .
The character and Finnegan 's casting was announced on 24 December 2015 .
James works as a solicitor and a Hollyoaks publicist said that James would cause " terrible trouble locally " upon arriving in the show and specifically target established character Cindy Savage ( Stephanie Waring ) .
Ste Hay ( Kieron Richardson ) and Harry Thompson ( Parry Glasspool ) will be confused as to why he spends time with Cindy as they believe that James is gay , which was later confirmed to be true .
Waring described James as being " very alluring and dashing , so of course Cindy is immediately taken in by his knight - in - shining - armour routine . "
MARNIE NIGHTINGALE Section::::Marnie Nightingale .
Marnie Nightingale , played by Lysette Anthony , made her first on - screen appearance on 1 February 2016 .
She is the ex - wife of Mac Nightingale ( David Easter ) and the biological mother of Nathan Nightingale ( Jared Garfield ) , Ellie Nightingale ( Sophie Porley ) and James Nightingale ( Gregory Finnegan ) .
She is the adoptive mother of Mac 's biological son , Alfie Nightingale ( Richard Linnell ) .
Marnie arrives in Hollyoaks revealing that she has been working with her son , James , with the inadvertent help of Cindy Savage ( Stephanie Waring ) , to drain her ex - husband , Mac , of his finances as he was awarded everything by the courts when they divorced .
She threatens to take away their daughter , Ellie , if he does not comply .
Mac then gives her a large amount of money to keep her away from Ellie .
Before she and James leave Hollyoaks , her other son , Nathan , accidentally reveals to her that Alfie is the biological son of Mac and Cindy .
Marnie is furious and goes to The Dog in the Pond public house where she reveals to everybody that Alfie is Mac and Cindy 's son .
Marnie then attempts to persuade Diane Hutchinson ( Alex Fletcher ) and Tony Hutchinson ( Nick Pickard ) to sell The Hutch to her in an attempt to get closer to her children .
However , their several attempts fail .
Marnie , with the help of James , steal Diane 's laptop to see whether if the restaurant is close to bankruptcy .
It is then revealed that the restaurant could be bankrupt by Easter , so she and James then return to the restaurant in a bid to persuade Diane and Tony into selling the restaurant .
However , Diane 's nephew Scott Drinkwell ( Ross Adams ) catches them with the laptop as they return it .
Marnie later learns that Tony earned money from betting with Darren Osborne ( Ashley Taylor Dawson ) .
She later informs Diane of this , leaving her upset .
Marnie later helps Ellie open up a beauty parlour .
At first , Ellie 's beauty parlour is unsuccessful .
However , when Ellie helps Freddie Roscoe ( Charlie Clapham ) and Tegan Lomax ( Jessica Ellis ) raise money for charity , her business starts to become a success .
After informing Alfie 's family , Cindy then tells Marnie that Alfie 's cancer had returned .
This leaves Marnie shocked and upset .
Marnie then tells Cindy that she had tried to be a good mother to Alfie , but she could n't love him as much as she loved Nathan , James and Ellie .
Marnie , Cindy and Neeta then put aside their differences so that they can all be there for Alfie .
After learning about Rachel 's death , Marnie becomes devastated .
She later meets Freddie at The Loft .
The pair start talking and they then both go back to Freddie 's house , where they have sex .
The next day , Marnie learns that Freddie is going on a date with Ellie .
She pretends that she and Freddie have n't met before and she introduces herself as Ellie 's mother , leaving Freddie horrified .
Marnie follows Ellie and Freddie as they go on a date at The Loft .
While Ellie leaves , Marnie tells Freddie if she does n't back away from her daughter , then she will tell her everything that happened between them .
The next day , Freddie breaks up with Ellie , leaving her devastated .
However , Ellie and Freddie later get back together again , much to Marnie 's dismay .
Since they got back together , Marnie has been constantly threatening Freddie to leave Ellie alone , but Freddie refuses .
Freddie even blackmails her at one point by using a picture of Marnie kissing him .
He said if she tries to break them up , he will show both Ellie and Mac the picture and they will never forgive her for what she did .
Marnie and James continue their plan into getting The Hutch .
Some of their plans have include getting Scott to distil alcoholic drinks , using Myra McQueen ( Nicole Barber - Lane ) to bankrupt Tony as she wants £ 8,000 from Tony as compensation for having a neck injury caused by Scott and manipulating Scott into burning The Hutch down .
Marnie and James are successful in buying The Hutch and rename it to " Nightingales " ; at its opening , Ellie is furious since her mother told her that she would turn the restaurant into a cosmetics shop to fulfill her daughter 's dream .
When Marnie 's mother , Tabitha Maxwell - Brown ( Linda Gray ) , visited the family , the majority of them were overwhelmed , apart from Mac who did not get along with Tabitha .
Tabitha returned to America when Marnie proclaimed her love for Mac .
In a bid to not lose her relationship with Ellie , Marnie claimed she had a brain tumour .
When Mac discovered the truth surrounding her brain tumour , he threatened to reveal the truth .
The family were left devastated when Nathan died after falling from a window and following this , Mac told the family that Marnie had been misdiagnosed and was not ill .
Marnie later discovered Mac 's evil actions including causing the school explosion killing his ex - fiancée Neeta in the process and pushing their son Nathan to death , she and James then decided to take revenge on Mac .
The character and casting was announced on 24 January 2016 .
It has been said that Marnie will waste no time in causing " chaos for Mac " and has been billed as " a complex , intriguing and hilarious matriarch with a big broken heart " and that she can start a fight in an empty room .
Marnie arrives in the village to help her son , James , take down Mac for events that happened in the past by using Cindy Savage ( Stephanie Waring ) against him , however she is unaware that Cindy is Alfie Nightingale 's ( Richard Linnell ) biological mother and the reason for her divorce from Mac .
A reporter writing for the Inside Soap Yearbook described Marnie 's entrance as " the classiest " of 2016 , before noting that she arrived wearing " the biggest hat ever seen in soap ! "
In August 2017 , Anthony was longlisted for " Best Bad Girl " at the Inside Soap Awards , while she and Nicole Barber - Lane ( Myra McQueen ) were longlisted for " Best Partnership " .
While Anthony was not shortlisted for " Best Bad Girl " , she and Barber - Lane made the shortlist for " Best Partnership " .
On 6 November 2017 , Anthony and Barber - Lane won the " Best Partnership " accolade .
In 2018 , Anthony was longlisted for " Funniest Female " at Inside Soap Awards .
LIAM DONOVAN Section::::Liam Donovan .
Liam Donovan , played by Maxim Baldry , made his first on screen appearance on 28 March 2016 .
Liam , alongside his brothers Adam Donovan ( Jimmy Essex ) and Jesse Donovan ( Luke Jerdy ) , were introduced as the brothers of Grace Black ( Tamara Wall ) .
Baldry left the series after one year and Liam departed in the episode first broadcast on 11 April 2017 .
On 3 August 2018 , it was announced that Liam would return , but the role would be recast to actor Jude Monk McGowan .
Liam first appears in Hollyoaks at Dee Valley Hospital after his now ex - girlfriend accidentally burned his bum with a pair of hair straighteners .
While receiving treatment for the burn , he catches the eyes of nurses
Tegan Lomax ( Jessica Ellis ) and Celine McQueen ( Sarah George ) .
They pretend to be disinterested with him , but when they see him at The Loft , Celine makes a move on him when Tegan reacts to having too many alcoholic drinks .
Celine and Liam make out in a hot tub but when she realises it was a girls ' night , she heads back home with him .
Later on , Tegan and Liam start to hang out
and when they arrive at her house , they start kissing on the sofa .
Liam ditches Tegan before she wakes up .
After both dates , Celine and Tegan text Liam behind each other 's backs .
After learning about what happened , Celine and Tegan start fighting over him .
When Lindsey Roscoe ( Sophie Austin ) gets annoyed with their behaviours , she makes them give their work badges to her and randomly selects who should go on the next date with him .
Lindsey randomly selects Celine for the next date , which makes Tegan annoyed and jealous .
However , Liam does n't turn up to the date , leaving Celine angry .
After Liam does n't show up to the date , Celine and Tegan swear that they wo n't speak to another man until the summer .
Unbeknownst to them , the pair text Liam constantly behind each other 's backs .
Later on , while Liam is in the hot tub , Tegan and Celine steal and make off with his clothes as revenge for two - timing them , leaving him naked in the tub .
The concept for the character was announced on 16 February 2016 whilst further details , such as the character 's name and casting were announced on the 21 March 2016 .
Liam will arrive in the village when he is admitted to hospital , where he catches the eye of both Tegan Lomax ( Jessica Ellis ) and Celine McQueen ( Sarah George ) .
Baldry said if his first scenes were anything to go by , then Liam will " get to know some of the Hollyoaks ladies very well .
" It 's been said that Liam " bails on relationships before things get too serious . "
A reporter writing for the Inside Soap Yearbook 2017 described the Donovan brothers as " tasty " , adding that they " set temperatures rising in Hollyoaks " .
On 11 April 2017 , it was confirmed that Baldry had left the show and Liam would depart in the episode broadcast that day .
He departed in what Digital Spy described as " a rather low - key exit " after blackmailing Grace for money .
On 3 August 2018 , it was announced that Liam would return to the series later that month , although the role had been recast to actor Jude Monk McGowan .
Liam returns after bumping into Courtney Campbell ( Amy Conachan ) , the mother of his daughter Iona , in Magaluf .
It was reported that since leaving the village , Liam had been on " a destructive path " while grieving for his former girlfriend , Eva Falco ( Kerry Bennett ) .
McGowan explained that Liam has not been dealing with his grieve and instead has been " burying it in drugs , alcohol and women . "
He added that Liam is in a " destructive and dark place " as a result of not dealing with his grieve .
On whether Liam would reunite with his daughter , McGowan said that Liam would struggle to accept his daughter as Iona was unplanned for , and he and Eva were expecting a baby before her death .
McGowan also thought that Liam would not reconnect with some of his family , but said that Liam " could n't care less ... and the feeling is mutual " .
Conachan believed that Jesse would accept Liam back into the family willingly , but Grace would not .
She expected there to be " a few personality clashes " between them and predicted that Liam and Jesse could clash over Iona .
JESSE DONOVAN Section::::Jesse Donovan .
Jesse Donovan , played by Luke Jerdy , made his first on screen appearance on 6 April 2016 .
Jesse , alongside his brothers Adam ( Jimmy Essex ) and Liam ( Maxim Baldry ) , were introduced as the half - brothers of Grace Black ( Tamara Wall ) .
Jesse first appears with his brother Liam Donovan when they pretend to be police officers .
He questions
Tegan Lomax ( Jessica Ellis ) and Celine McQueen ( Sarah George ) about the disappearance of the clothes and wallet belonging to Liam .
He then takes them down to the police station for further questioning .
However , it is revealed that it was a plan to get back at Tegan and Celine for stealing Liam 's belongings .
After Jesse reveals that he is really Liam 's brother , Celine threatens to have him arrested for impersonating a police officer .
Jesse returns with Liam a couple of weeks later , and is attracted to Tegan 's older sister , Leela Lomax ( Kirsty - Leigh Porter ) , however he is scared off by her controlling boyfriend , Cameron Campbell ( Cameron Moore ) .
Jesse later invites Ellie Nightingale ( Sophie Porley ) and Neeta Kaur ( Amrit Maghera ) to his and Liam 's house party , and Neeta falls asleep in his arms with Ellie maliciously photographing her .
Ellie 's manipulative mother , Marnie ( Lysette Anthony ) , shows Neeta 's fiancé , Mac Nightingale ( David Easter ) the photograph , so he savagely attacks Jesse in his own home , with Neeta screaming for him to stop .
This subsequently puts a strain on Mac and Neeta 's relationship , as she becomes frightened of his temper after watching his attack on Jesse .
Jesse is later distressed after Liam is accidentally shot by their older half - sister , Grace , however is thrilled when he survives and begins a relationship with Celine , despite protests from Liam , who had had sex with her before .
Jesse is devastated when Celine dumps him favour of marrying Diego Salvador Martinez Hernandez De La Cruz ( Juan Pablo Yepez ) , unaware it is a scam so the McQueen family can inherit Diego 's multimillion - pound inheritance .
At the wedding , they do not marry because Celine can not go through with it , but when she confesses this to Jesse , he chooses not to date her .
In January 2017 , Jesse is arrested and imprisoned for Celine 's murder after she goes missing .
This came about after Adam discovered that Jesse had a one - night stand with his former fiancée , Darcy Wilde
( Aisling Jarrett - Gavin ) , before she went missing .
Later , Celine 's real murderer is revealed to be Cameron , so Jesse is released , however receives abuse from his customers about Celine 's disappearance .
In June 2017 , he begins a relationship with Darcy .
The concept for the character was announced on 16 February 2016 whilst further details such as the character 's name and casting were announced on 21 March 2016 .
Jesse , as with the rest of the Donovans will be Grace Black 's ( Tamara Wall ) brothers .
Jerdy has said that his character is " cheeky , loyal and has a real zest for life . "
He has been billed as " a fool for love , who 's always unlucky with the ladies because his over - enthusiasm leads to him being friend - zoned . "
A reporter writing for the Inside Soap Yearbook 2017 described the Donovan brothers as " tasty " , adding that they " set temperatures rising in Hollyoaks " .
In August 2017 , Jerdy was longlisted for Funniest Male at the Inside Soap Awards .
He did not progress to the viewer - voted shortlist .
ADAM DONOVAN Section::::Adam Donovan .
Adam Donovan , played by Jimmy Essex , made his first on screen appearance on 6 April 2016 .
Adam , alongside his brothers Jesse ( Luke Jerdy ) and Liam ( Maxim Baldry ) , were introduced as the brothers of Grace Black ( Tamara Wall ) .
The concept for the character was announced on 16 February 2016 whilst further details such as the character 's name and casting were announced on 21 March 2016 .
Adam , as with the rest of the Donovans will be Grace Black 's ( Tamara Wall ) brothers .
A show insider has teased that Adam has " a strong conscience , which stops him from straying over certain lines that Grace would n't think twice about crossing . "
A reporter writing for the Inside Soap Yearbook 2017 described the Donovan brothers as " tasty " , adding that they " set temperatures rising in Hollyoaks " .
Adam arrives looking for his brothers , Liam and Jesse , and reveals himself as Grace 's oldest half - brother .
He insists that Liam and Jesse must come home , but he decides to stay after Grace 's husband , Trevor Royle ( Greg Wood ) , is murdered on their wedding day .
On 23 May , Adam is fatally shot by his father , Glenn .
LISA LOVEDAY
Section::::Lisa Loveday .
Lisa Loveday , played by Rachel Adedeji , made her first on - screen appearance on 29 April 2016 .
Lisa is the daughter of Simone ( Jacqueline Boatswain ) and Louis Loveday ( Karl Collins ) and brother of Zack Loveday ( Duayne Boachie ) who had been missing for 15 years .
Lisa first appears in Hollyoaks at the police station when her kidnapper and adoptive mother , Margaret Smith ( Suzette Llewellyn ) , is arrested for kidnapping her .
Her mother Simone Loveday ( Jacqueline Boatswain ) and father Louis Loveday ( Karl Collins ) are stunned to see her .
Louis and Simone later do a DNA test to see if she 's really their daughter , and the results come back as positive .
Lisa later confronts Sonia Albright ( Kiza Deen ) after she discovered that she stole her life .
Lisa then attacks Sonia for stealing her life , and Zack Loveday ( Duayne Boachie ) breaks them up and separates them .
Zack later takes Lisa back to his house and he and his parents show her objects and pictures from the past , which she remembers .
Lisa later goes to the police station to confront Margaret , who she 's angry with for kidnapping her and making her believe that her parents and brother were killed in a car crash .
However , Margaret manipulates Lisa into by saying she took her in because her parents did n't love her .
She believes what she says and later disowns the Lovedays for having Margaret arrested .
As a result of Margaret 's manipulation , Lisa wrecks Price Slice .
As soon as Simone and Louis walk in , she pours some sauce on Sonia 's hair and blames her for all of the damage .
Simone believes her , but Zack and Louis do not .
After the incident , Louis sees Joanne on the street and they talk about what had happened .
Joanne reveals that nobody knows what Lisa is truly like , and therefore , Louis grows even more suspicious of Lisa afterwards .
Eventually , Sonia pleads guilty to the wreckage with Joanne by her side at the police station , even though she did n't really do it .
Joanne tells her that it would be better to plead not guilty , but Sonia objects to this idea .
Lisa later begins a feud with Sonia , trying to separate her from Zack and ruin her life .
Lisa persuades Simone to take the restaurant away from Sonia in which she does leaving Lisa the manager .
Lisa forms friendships with Holly Cunningham ( Amanda Clapham ) , Ellie Nightingale ( Sophie Porley ) and Cleo McQueen ( Nadine Rose Mulkerrin ) .
When Sonia applies for a course at Hollyoaks University , Lisa ruins it revealing about Sonia imposing her .
This leads to a fight between them , leading to Lisa hurting her ankle .
In order to spite Sonia more , Lisa sets Holly with Zack however the plan does not work , leaving her furious .
Lisa is furious when Simone and Louis accept his relationship with Sonia , so Lisa decides to begin a relationship with Jesse Donovan ( Luke Jerdy ) , leaving Simone angry .
After a failed romance with Nathan Nightingale ( Jared Garfield ) , Lisa 's friend , Cleo , sets both Lisa and Nathan up .
They begin a problematic relationship , but however , during a village blackout , they have sex .
However , after getting engaged to Nathan and moving in with him and his family , Lisa has sex with Nathan 's father , Mac Nightingale ( David Easter ) , and the pair swear each other to secrecy .
Mac and Lisa then begin an affair .
The character of Lisa has been known since 2015 , but former friend Sonia Albright
( Kiza Deen ) has been pretending to be her .
Lisa has been billed as " a loud and brassy party animal " and " is on a mission to claim back the family that is rightfully hers " .
Rachel Adedeji was cast in the role of Lisa and had already begun filming with the show when her casting was announced .
Adedeji stated she was " excited " to have joined the show 's cast , but said it was " quite a pressure " to be introduced as Lisa because " she is such an anticipated arrival " .
Adedeji added that Lisa 's backstory had " turned her into a tough cookie " .
Adedeji 's agent informed her that Hollyoaks were interested in hiring her .
She attended a meeting with production and read for the part .
Adedeji told Lorraine Kelly that her character has " sass " and is " feisty " .
Adedeji made a temporary departure from Hollyoaks for maternity leave , with her character leaving on 1 December 2017 .
She will make her on - screen return on 13 November 2018 .
In August 2017 , Adedeji was longlisted for " Sexiest Female " at the Inside Soap Awards .
She did not progress to the viewer - voted shortlist .
D.S.
GAVIN
ARMSTRONG Section::::D.S. Gavin Armstrong .
Detective Sergeant Gavin Armstrong , played by Andrew Hayden - Smith , made his first on screen appearance on 15 June 2016 as a detective sergeant who starts to investigate the disappearance of Patrick Blake ( Jeremy Sheffield ) .
D.S. Gavin Armstrong first appears with D.S. Geoff Thorpe ( James Bradshaw ) .
D.S. Armstrong and D.S. Thorpe meet with Patrick 's daughter , Sienna Blake ( Anna Passey ) , and D.S. Thorpe introduces her to D.S. Armstrong , informing her that he will be taking over the investigation into Patrick 's disappearance .
D.S. Thorpe then reveals that they have found some new evidence , intriguing Sienna .
D.S. Armstrong and D.S. Thorpe take Sienna to the woods , where they reveal that her daughter and Patrick 's real murderer , Nico Blake ( Persephone Swales - Dawson ) , as their new witness .
D.S. Armstrong reveals he believes that Patrick 's wife , Maxine Minniver ( Nikki Sanderson ) , was the person who murdered Patrick , and Sienna agrees to help the police get a confession from Maxine .
D.S. Armstrong later reveals to Sienna that Maxine 's boyfriend , " Mike Jones " , is Warren Fox ( Jamie Lomas ) and Sienna persuades Warren to help them get a confession from Maxine .
D.S. Armstrong develops a sudden attraction to Leela Lomax ( Kirsty - Leigh Porter ) , who begins receiving sinister messages .
Leela immediately reports this to the police and Armstrong takes charge of the case .
D.S. Armstrong implies to Leela that her friend , Zack Loveday ( Duayne Boachie ) , could be stalking her , which Leela assumes .
D.S. Armstrong provides Leela with her stalker 's number and when she calls it , the phone rings in her daughter , Peri Lomax 's ( Ruby O'Donnell ) , bag .
Peri denies any involvement and D.S. Armstrong concludes the stalker planted the phone on Peri .
He later claims that Leela 's former husband , Cameron Campbell ( Cameron Moore ) , who is a serial killer , has escaped from prison , with the Lomax family losing their electricity shortly after .
D.S. Armstrong fixes their electricity and claims Cameron had been hiding and never escaped .
Leela thanks D.S. Armstrong and it is revealed that he is stalking Leela and watching her after planting a virus on her laptop .
D.S. Armstrong later deliberately interrupts an intimate moment between Leela and Zack .
Following the murder of Amy Barnes ' ( Ashley Slanina - Davies ) , D.S. Armstrong arrests her former partner , Ste Hay ( Kieron Richardson ) and makes him confess to her murder .
D.S. Armstrong supports Leela and they have sex , although Leela rejects him the following day , claiming it to be a mistake .
Frustrated , D.S. Armstrong graffitis Leela 's wall , which Leela reports to the police .
D.S. Armstrong 's colleague and Amy 's widower , Ryan Knight ( Duncan James ) , takes a statement from Leela and realises D.S. Armstrong is her stalker , but decides not to report it at risk of Ste being acquitted of Amy 's murder .
When D.S. Armstrong plants spray paint in Zack 's bag and arrests him , Ryan releases Zack from custody and tells Leela that a man serving jail time is her stalker , before warning D.S. Armstrong and telling him to take sick leave and seek psychiatric help .
However , as he is leaving , D.S. Armstrong watches Leela through his hidden camera .
D.S. Armstrong returns two months later just as Leela and Zack are about to reunite .
A jealous D.S. Armstrong pushes Zack down the stairs outside the Lomax house .
Zack is rushed to hospital where he says he was pushed .
Zack 's father , Louis Loveday ( Karl Collins ) , reports this to D.S. Armstrong who promises to find Zack 's attacker as he is clearly dangerous .
D.S. Armstrong breaks into Leela 's flat , stealing a photo of her and her nightgown .
However , when Leela reports the theft to him he slips up by revealing information he was n't supposed to know .
Leela confronts D.S. Armstrong who blackmails her into silence by threatening to tell Zack that Louis is Daniel 's biological father .
D.S. Armstrong then turns his attentions to Dirk Savage 's ( David Kennedy ) wife , Cindy Savage ( Stephanie Waring ) .
He moves in with Dirk and Cindy as a lodger , sets up a fake website with nasty messages about Cindy and then plays the role of the hero .
D.S. Armstrong then arranges for Dirk to receive a false telephone call claiming that his daughter , Liberty ( Abi Phillips ) has been in an accident .
After Dirk leaves , D.S. Armstrong persuades Cindy to attend a conference in Liverpool .
D.S. Armstrong accompanies Cindy to protect her , having booked adjacent rooms at the hotel for Cindy and himself .
When Cindy realises the conference is a fake , D.S. Armstrong convinces her that she should stay in a locked room with him for her safety .
D.S. Armstrong deliberately spills wine on Cindy 's dress and tries to kiss her .
Cindy rejects D.S. Armstrong , reminding him she is married to Dirk .
While in the bathroom , Cindy receives a phone call from Leela warning her that D.S. Armstrong is her stalker .
Cindy runs for it .
D.S. Armstrong is arrested but later released on bail .
Milo Entwistle ( Nathan Morris ) visits D.S. Armstrong in prison , where D.S. Armstrong threatens to reveal Milo 's secret unless he brings him Cindy 's nightie .
When Milo does deliver , D.S. Armstrong discovers that it is the wrong one , so he threatens Milo again , getting him to hack into the prison system and forge a document to get him released .
After D.S. Armstrong is released , Cindy and Leela walk into Nightingale 's restaurant and stand up to him .
D.S. Armstrong falls for a trap set by Milo , and is later killed after being electrocuted by Christmas lights orchestrated by Milo .
The character and casting was announced on 12 May 2016 .
A Hollyoaks spokesperson has billed him as " young , driven , and ambitious " , with Hayden - Smith stating that his character is " very authoritative so anyone hiding secrets is anxious when they are in his presence , and rightly so . " MARIA Section::::Maria .
Maria , played by Fernanda Diniz , made her first on screen appearance on 1 August 2016 .
Maria was introduced as the sister of established character Diego Salvador Martinez Hernandez De La Cruz ( Juan Pablo Yepez ) .
Maria arrives in Hollyoaks unexpectedly , surprising her brother Diego .
She then meets Mercedes , who says to both of them that she 's staying in Hollyoaks for a little while .
Mercedes then offers to take her bag , but Maria is reluctant .
Then the pair tussle over it , then the bag drops onto the floor , revealing a stash of drugs .
It is then revealed that Maria has smuggled cocaine into the village so she can give the drugs to a drug dealer .
Mercedes then orders Diego to kick Maria out , but Maria ca n't go until she has given the drugs .
Maria then meets Diego 's girlfriend Myra .
Myra first believed that Diego was cheating on her with Maria , but when he introduced her as his sister , she was shocked that his sister came unexpectedly .
When Myra helps Maria with her belongings , Maria and Diego talk Spanish in private .
Maria blackmails him into helping her with the deal , otherwise she will reveal his darkest secret to Myra - who he really is .
Later on , Maria , Diego and Mercedes talk about the drugs , which Myra overhears .
Diego and Maria lie about the drug deal and that Maria has been taking drugs so she can relieve her physical pain .
Maria and Diego go to the Hollyoaks city wall .
However , Maria suddenly collapses and is taken back to the McQueen house .
Diego offers to take the drugs for her , but Maria refuses as the dealer is expecting a female .
Maria then suggests that Mercedes take the drugs as she is a female too , but Mercedes refuses to .
The character had been previously mentioned on - screen , but her arrival and casting was not announced until 26 July 2016 .
Maria arrives in the village unexpectedly , to the shock of Diego , sparking immediate chaos .
It was revealed that she would tell Diego and Mercedes McQueen ( Jennifer Metcalfe ) that she is smuggling drugs , with the latter ordering Diego to get rid of Maria and the drugs .
Diego and Maria later meet with a dealer in order to " solve her problems once and for all " , but Diego 's partner Myra McQueen ( Nicole Barber - Lane ) would " start to smell a rat " .
RYAN KNIGHT Section::::Ryan Knight .
Ryan Knight , played by Blue singer Duncan James , made his first appearance on 12 August 2016 .
He is introduced as Amy Barnes 's ( Ashley Slanina - Davies ) fiancé following her return to the show .
James ' departure was announced October 2017 .
Ryan 's last episode aired on 7 May 2018 .
In his very last scene , it appeared Ryan had drowned in a river .
On 8 May 2018 , it was confirmed Ryan had drowned when his body was discovered .
The character and casting was announced on 22 May 2016 .
Ryan has been billed as " a good guy in a committed relationship who will move into the village .
He is a grounded family man with principles and integrity but who will fight tooth and nail for what he believes in . "
Slanina - Davies was reintroduced following her 2012 departure , with James confirmed to be playing Amy 's fiancée , Ryan alongside the announcement .
Ryan was described as the " polar opposite " of Amy 's ex - partner Ste Hay ( Kieron Richardson ) .
It was announced that Ryan would " go head - to - head " with Ste for a storyline tackling blended family life .
A show spokesperson teased that " viewers will be torn between luckless Ste and a man who on paper is a better example for his children but not their dad . "
On 8 August 2016 , the show announced that a new storyline would begin on - screen which would find Ryan under suspicion of child abuse .
The storyline would begin when Ste discovers a bruise on his and Amy 's daughter , Leah Barnes ' ( Elà - May Dermican ) arm and suspect Ryan to be responsible .
Daniel Kilkelly of Digital Spy described the storyline as " explosive " .
For his portrayal of Ryan , James was nominated for Best Newcomer at the 22nd National Television Awards .
Ryan arrives in Hollyoaks with his fiancée , Amy Barnes , and her two children , Leah ( Elà - May Dermican ) and Lucas ( William Hall ) .
He is the nephew of D.S. Geoff Thorpe ( James Bradshaw ) and joins his uncle working at the Dee Valley police station .
Ryan immediately clashes with Amy 's ex - boyfriend , Ste Hay .
Ste does not want Ryan around his kids and they constantly come to blows .
Amy and Ryan win full custody of the kids and try to cut Ste out of the kids ' lives .
One night , after an argument with Amy , Ryan has sex with Mercedes McQueen ( Jennifer Metcalfe ) .
Amy finds out Ryan cheated and dumps him so he leaves for Canada .
Ryan returns from Canada and begs Amy to marry him .
Amy comes around and they are married in a beautiful ceremony .
After the ceremony , Ryan and Amy announce they are moving to the United States , where Ryan has been offered a job .
Ste refuses to let Ryan and Amy take the kids and they go to an emergency custody hearing .
The judge grants Ryan and Amy permission to move with the kids , leaving Ste furious .
Amy is murdered later that night , her body being found by Ryan and her father , Mike ( Tony Hirst ) .
Ste is charged with Amy 's murder .
Ryan takes over raising Leah and Lucas .
He grows close to Mercedes and they begin a relationship .
Ryan claims he was at the Loft while Amy was murdered , but the CCTV footage is missing .
Ryan admits to Mercedes that he stole the footage because he had cheated on Amy that night .
The person he slept with turns out to be Kyle Kelly ( Adam Rickitt ) .
Ryan is scared that the truth about his adultery and sexuality will come out .
Ryan has Kyle arrested for drug dealing to stop him from exposing their affair to Mercedes , but Kyle ends up telling her anyways
and she dumps Ryan .
Ryan works with Ste 's lawyer James Nightingale ( Gregory Finnegan ) , who hates Ste for ruining his relationship with John Paul McQueen ( James Sutton ) , to throw the case against him .
James begins to take things too far and Ryan cuts ties with him .
Ryan testifies to Ste 's good character in court and Ste is acquitted .
Ryan 's colleague , D.S. Gavin Armstrong ( Andrew Hayden - Smith ) , is later charged with Amy 's murder .
It is eventually revealed that it was Ryan who murdered Amy .
Ryan had accidentally called Amy during his encounter with Kyle and left her a voicemail .
When Ryan arrived home , Amy confronted him about cheating on her .
She threatened to tell everyone he is gay
and he murdered her in a fit of rage .
Kyle is released from prison and begs Ryan to give them a chance , but Ryan vehemently refuses .
Ryan tries to pick up a male prostitute , but then has to pretend he is on sting operation when the prostitute turns out to be Harry Thompson ( Parry Glasspool ) .
James is suspicious and confronts Ryan , who emotionally admits that he sleeps with men .
Needing a cover , Ryan begins dating Ste 's half - sister , Tegan Lomax ( Jessica Ellis ) .
Ryan becomes overwhelmed with guilt and decides to confess to murdering Amy .
However , Harry 's stepmother , Diane Hutchinson ( Alex Fletcher ) , tells Ryan that it was Harry who murdered Amy .
Harry had gone to confront Amy about taking Ste 's children and she accidentally fell and hit her head .
Ryan threatens to turn Harry into the police , but James blackmails him that he will tell everyone he is gay if he does .
Ste and Ryan impulsively sleep together , but Ryan declares it a mistake .
Harry is arrested for Amy 's murder .
Tegan is upset with Ryan when she learns he already knew what Harry did .
Both feeling lost , Ryan and Ste turn to each other and Tegan sees them in the heat of passion .
Tegan and Ryan have an explosive confrontation and he calls Tegan by Amy 's name , making her realise that he killed Amy .
When Tegan threatens to go to the police , Ryan suffocates her .
Believing that he has killed her , Ryan places Tegan in the bath to make it look like an accident .
Tegan turns out to still be alive , but she is in a coma .
Ryan learns Tegan
left Kim Butterfield ( Daisy Wood - Davis ) a voicemail the night he attacked her .
Kim tells Ryan
she knows he killed Amy
so he kidnaps her and locks her in the basement of Hollyoaks High .
Ste tells Ryan that Tegan has woken up from her coma , though this turns out to be a lie told by Tegan 's niece , Peri ( Ruby O'Donnell ) .
Ryan leaves town fearing that the truth about him will be exposed .
Ryan rushes back to town when he receives a message from Ste saying Leah is in hospital , but it turns out Leah is fine and that she had actually sent him the message .
Leela ( Kirsty - Leigh Porter ) publicly confronts Ste and Ryan about their affair .
Ryan finally accepts that he is gay and starts a relationship with Ste .
When Geoff confronts Ryan over Amy 's murder , Ryan strangles his uncle to death , which is witnessed by Glenn Donovan ( Bob Cryer ) .
Glenn gets Ryan to help him frame Shane Sweeney ( Michael Salami ) for the murder of both Geoff and Trigger ( Adam Sina ) .
Tegan awakes from her coma and reveals everything Ryan has done .
Ryan is finally arrested for Amy 's murder .
Ryan makes a deal with Kim 's girlfriend , Farrah Maalik ( Krupa Pattani ) : he will tell her the location of Kim 's body ( though Kim is actually still alive ) , but only if she breaks him out of prison .
Farrah helps Ryan escape , but then he discovers she is wearing a wire .
Ryan manages to get away and tracks down Ste , Harry , Leah , and Lucas at a campsite , where he confesses all of his crimes to them .
Ryan runs off when he hears sirens and Harry chases after him .
Ryan and Harry struggle and Ryan accidentally falls into a river .
Ryan screams for Harry to help him , but Harry walks away .
Harry feels guilty over what he did to Ryan and fears he may actually still be alive .
However , it is confirmed Ryan died when his body is discovered .
Everyone affected by Ryan 's actions has to figure out a way to pick up the pieces .
COURTNEY CAMPBELL Section::::Courtney Campbell .
Courtney Campbell , played by Amy Conachan , is the cousin of Cameron Campbell ( Cameron Moore ) and his brother Lockie ( Nick Rhys ) .
She made her first on screen appearance on 29 August 2016 .
Courtney arrived in Hollyoaks , to the shock of Cameron who ordered her to leave .
Cameron 's fiancée Leela Lomax ( Kirsty Leigh Porter ) convinced him to let Courtney stay
and they later discussed childhood memories , where Courtney revealed she held a grudge against Cameron because he destroyed her favourite teddy bear .
Courtney persuaded Tom Cunningham ( Ellis Hollins ) into allowing Cameron 's daughter Peri Lomax ( Ruby O'Donnell ) to see her infant daughter .
Courtney questioned the whereabouts of Lockie , which unnerved Cameron .
She also bonded with Alfie Nightingale ( Richard Linnell ) over their love of science and revealed that she is a science teacher .
Courtney clashed with Sally St. Claire ( Annie Wallace ) , unaware she is the headmistress of Hollyoaks High School , the school she is hoping to begin work at .
When she discovers Sally 's identity , she apologies and is offered a job .
Courtney launches a poster campaign and website looking for Lockie , to the shock of Cameron who orders her to stop as the stress is bad for a pregnant Leela .
Courtney agrees to end her search , but subsequently the police notify the Campbells that Lockie 's body has been found .
Upon being asked to identify the body , Cameron informs the police that it is not Lockie ; but tells his family the body was Lockie 's .
Later in January 2017 , it is revealed that Cameron not only murdered Lockie , but also killed Celine McQueen , Ziggy Roscoe , Joe Roscoe , Nico Blake , and Danny and Sam Lomax .
He is soon arrested and sentenced to 14 years in prison .
Courtney becomes saddened by her cousin 's crimes and , after a heated confrontation with Goldie McQueen ( Chelsee Healey ) who also blames Courtney for Celine 's death , decides to return to Scotland .
But Tegan and Leela declare her as family and convince her to stay .
The character and casting was announced on 18 July 2016 .
Courtney arrives in the village searching for Lockie following his disappearance .
She will also become a science teacher at Hollyoaks High School .
TRACEY DONOVAN Section::::Tracey Donovan .
Tracey Donovan , played by Lisa Maxwell , made her first on screen appearance on 12 September 2016 .
Tracey is the mother of established characters Clare Devine ( Gemma Bissix ) , Grace Black ( Tamara Wall ) , Adam Donovan ( Jimmy Essex ) , Liam Donovan ( Maxim Baldry ) and Jesse Donovan ( Luke Jerdy ) and the ex - wife of the character Fraser Black ( Jesse Birdsall ) .
The character and casting was announced on 7 August 2016 , with further details about the character revealed on 8 August 2016 .
Maxwell filmed her first scenes prior to the announcement of her casting .
The character is billed as a " train wreck " who has had a " tough life " , which Daniel Kilkelly of Digital Spy described as not being " a huge shock " considering she was married to Fraser , a " dangerous gangster " .
Tracey 's backstory states that she left Grace and her sister Clare Devine ( Gemma Bissix ) when they were " very young " in an attempt to " escape the dark clutches " of " evil " Fraser .
It continued to state that Grace has since " resented " her mother because she was left to live a " dangerous life of crime and corruption " , whilst her mother went on to meet a man who she had three more children , Adam , Liam and Jesse , with .
Kilkelly observed that Tracey 's backstory explained why the three brothers were " so happy - go - lucky " in comparison to Grace .
It was teased that there could be " fireworks " when Tracey and Grace reunite because they " are not the best of friends " and there is " not a lot of love lost between them . "
A show insider added that Tracey would add an " interesting dynamic " to the Donovan family and that Maxwell " enjoyed " filming , with show bosses believing that the audience would " love " scenes between Maxwell and Wall .
For the role , Maxwell has required to have a " make - under " to make her appear older on - screen as there is only a 13-year age difference between Maxwell and Wall , with her describing the " make - under " as " great , terrific fun " .
The Sun reported that Tracey 's arrival in the village " could spell disaster " for Grace 's family and that she would " reveal a shocking secret which could mean bad news " for Adam , Liam and Jesse .
Kilkelly said that he " hardly recognised " Maxwell in her first promotional image .
Executive producer Bryan Kirkwood later revealed that Maxwell would become a " recurring guest star " , meaning that she would " pop up from time to time " and not move into the village on a regular basis .
On 21 September 2017 , Tracey was killed off when she drowned after falling off a boat following an altercation with her arch - enemy , Darcy Wilde
( Aisling Jarrett - Gavin ) .
She appeared in a flashback sequence on 2 October 2017 , which was her final appearance .
JUANITA SALVADOR
MARTINEZ
HERNANDEZ DE LA CRUZ Section::::Juanita Salvador Martinez Hernandez De La Cruz .
Juanita Salvador Martinez Hernandez De La Cruz , played by Jacey Sallés made her first on - screen appearance on 19 September 2016 .
She was introduced as the mother of Diego Salvador Martinez Hernandez De La Cruz ( Juan Pablo Yepez ) .
Juanita is first mentioned when Diego and his much older pregnant fiancée , Myra McQueen ( Nicole Barber - Lane ) , are struggling financially , and Diego states that Juanita is worth £ 5 million .
Excited , Myra calls Juanita in from Venezuela in order to get Diego 's inheritance .
However , upon her arrival , Juanita sees Myra 's face on front - page news after conning the newspaper company into believing that Jesse Donovan ( Luke Jerdy ) is her unborn child 's father .
Panicked after hearing Juanita insulting her , Myra asks her niece Celine McQueen ( Sarah George ) to pretend to be Diego 's fiancée , which she does and Juanita takes a shining to her .
She promises to return for their wedding , and so Celine revises Diego 's ancestry in order to be believed as Diego 's fiancée .
This hurts Myra having to watch Diego and Celine marry , and equally hurts Celine who is desperate to be with her lover , Jesse .
Juanita later returns for Celine and Myra 's daughter Mercedes McQueen 's ( Jennifer Metcalfe )
hen parties , who is getting married to Joe Roscoe ( Ayden Callaghan ) at the same time that Diego will marry Celine .
Juanita insults the family home and Cindy Savage ( Stephanie Waring ) , which instantly leads to her becoming unwelcome around the village .
The hen night ends disastrously , however , when Mercedes , Cindy and Tegan Lomax ( Jessica Ellis ) are all arrested for fighting .
On the day of the wedding , Diego and Celine are prepared to marry as Juanita watches on , however a visit from Jesse throws Celine 's intentions .
As Diego and Celine say their vows , Myra arrives and stops the wedding , revealing to Juanita that she is engaged to Diego and that Diego is the father of her unborn baby .
Juanita then gives Diego an ultimatum : he either leaves Myra or he will not get his share of her inheritance .
Diego chooses to be with Myra and their baby , and so Juanita storms out of the church , infuriated .
The character and casting was announced on 21 August 2016 .
It was reported that Juanita would arrive in Hollyoaks to meet his new partner .
She was billed as " a glamorous and feisty woman with an iron will , who always wanted the best for her son " .
Sallés told Susan Hill from the Daily Star that she apologised to fellow cast members for nasty remarks her character makes .
She added " Juanita is like a pantomime villain – the sort of character you 'd boo and hiss .
She 's so vile and rude . "
BILLY BRODIE Section::::Billy Brodie .
William " Billy " Brodie , played by Clive Russell , appeared in two episodes on 20 September 2016 and 21 September 2016 .
Billy was introduced as Jack Osborne 's ( Jimmy McKenna ) brother and the father of Eva Falco ( Kerry Bennett ) .
Jack receives a visiting order from Billy and visits him in prison .
It becomes clear that Jack is hiding a huge secret , which Billy is aware of and uses this to persuade Jack to give him a large amount of money .
However , Jack refuses , and Billy reveals that he is dying from a heart condition .
The following day , Billy is rushed to hospital where his daughter Eva visits him and he asks her not to interfere with Jack anymore .
Billy dies shortly afterwards , with Eva ignoring her father 's requests and seeking revenge on Jack .
One year after his death , his name was finally cleared when his brother Jack confess the truth .
The character had been referenced several times on screen before being cast , with more details about the character along with his casting was announced on 20 August 2016 .
Billy is set to reveal a deadly secret to Eva which will " make a large impact on the Osborne family . "
NICK SAVAGE Section::::Nick Savage .
Nicholas " Nick " Savage , played by Ben - Ryan Davies , made his first on screen appearance on 21 September 2016 .
He is introduced as Dirk Savage 's ( David Kennedy ) nephew .
He made his final appearance on 29 June 2017 .
Nick first arrives when his uncle Dirk Savage 's ( David Kennedy ) wife Cindy ( Stephanie Waring ) opens the door for Nick , who introduces himself .
Nick reveals that Dirk allowed him to stay for university .
Nick starts working at The Hutch when Marnie Nightingale ( Lysette Anthony ) employs him .
Nick can not cope with being a waiter and decides to swap jobs with Cindy .
During " Freshers " week , Cindy 's daughter Holly Cunningham ( Amanda Clapham ) introduces him to her friends and unknown to Nick , Holly is attracted to him .
Holly is upset when Tegan Lomax ( Jessica Ellis ) flirts with Nick .
Nick confronts Freddie Roscoe ( Charlie Clapham )
when he argues with Ellie Nightingale ( Sophie Porley ) .
Ellie later kisses
Nick
and they start talking .
They later go to Ellie 's bedroom , where a drunken Ellie falls asleep , however Nick misreads the situation and continues kissing Ellie .
Ellie is shocked the following morning when Nick claims that they had sex , as Ellie does not remember giving her consent .
Ellie starts acting awkwardly with Nick , who has begun flirting with Holly , which worries Ellie .
In 2017 , Nick is later arrested after Ellie reports him to the police for raping her , but the charges are dropped after Lisa Loveday ( Rachel Adedeji ) reports it as a fake , due to her part for revenge to Ellie 's father , Mac Nightingale ( David Easter ) .
However , Nick later turns against Ellie , and offers his condolences following the death of her older brother , Nathan Nightingale ( Jared Garfield ) .
Nick begins an affair with Tegan , having sex regularly at work .
When Tegan believes she is pregnant , Nick rejects her , so Tegan tells Holly about their affair .
Holly forgives Nick , and they reconcile .
Nick and Holly go to his graduation party at The Dog , where Zack Loveday ( Duayne Boachie ) tells Nick that he and Holly kissed .
Nick humiliates Holly , but she forgives him and they go back home .
Nick wants to have sex with Holly , but she refuses .
Nick ignores her pleas and rapes her , in a similar fashion to Ellie .
The next day , Holly confronts Nick about her not giving consent , but he becomes aggressive and defensive towards her .
Holly reports Nick to the police after telling Ellie what Nick has done to her .
Nick is released on bail and goes to the hospital to talk to Tegan .
When Tegan refuses to allow him to stay with her and her family , he brands her a " bitch " .
Nick talks to Holly , blackmailing her by threatening to upload their sex tape online if she refuses to retract her statement .
Nick tells Dirk that neither Ellie or Holly consented to having sex .
Dirk phones the police and Nick confesses to raping Ellie and Holly .
He is arrested and thrown out by his parents .
Nick asks for Dirk 's help , but he is reluctant .
While waiting for Dirk at the folly , Nick is confronted by Holly
and she asks him to leave .
Nick is sentenced to 7 years imprisonment for the rapes of Ellie and Holly , and must serve at least 3 and a half years , before he is considered for parole .
In 2018 , Dirk went to visit him in prison and told him that Tegan is in coma which devastated him .
The character and casting was announced on 18 August 2016 .
Nick is Dirk 's fun - loving nephew who 's able to make " a dodgy deal like any true Savage and he 's also a typical ladies ' man " who will catch the eyes of several female residents of the village .
Nick has been billed as " fun - loving " , " the popular boy who all the lads wanted to be friends with and all the girls fancied " and someone able to make " a dodgy deal like any true Savage and he 's also a typical ladies ' man " .
It was reported that Nick would catch the eyes of several female residents of the village .
It was also announced that Nick would be involved in a storyline which would see the issue of sexual consent explored .
The show worked with Rape Crisis and youth charity
The Mix when creating the storyline and show bosses hoped that the storyline would " divide opinions " , but promised that the issue would be " sensitively explored " .
The storyline would begin where Ellie and Nick have sex after getting drunk during Fresher 's Week , but the following morning Ellie would wake up with no recollection of what happened .
Davies said that he was " really interested " in seeing his character 's progress throughout the story .
He added that it was " a very important issue " which carried " big responsibility " .
Davies said that he was " honoured " that the show had entrusted him with the storyline .
Zoë Bailie from The Mix said that the story " could n't be more timely " and added that " working together with Hollyoaks , we hope to break down the myths surrounding consent .
We want to help young people understand what consent is , what it is n't and importantly how to make sure they have it before entering into a sexual experience . "
EVA FALCO Section::::Eva Falco .
Detective Inspector Eva Falco , played by Kerry Bennett , is the niece of Jack Osborne ( Jimmy McKenna ) .
She first appeared on 21 September 2016 and made her final appearance on 17 January 2017 , where the character was killed off .
Eva is first seen visiting her father , Billy Brodie ( Clive Russell ) , in hospital and is left devastated when he dies .
Despite warning from Billy not to , Eva seeks revenge on Billy 's brother , Jack , believing he is responsible for her father 's life in prison .
She breaks into his home and trashes the place , with Jack and Esther Bloom ( Jazmine Franks ) reporting the crime to the police .
Eva is revealed as the detective in charge of the investigation and informs Jack and Esther that there is nothing to worry about .
Eva later meets Liam Donovan ( Maxim Baldry ) in The Loft nightclub
and they have sex .
When she discovers he was planning to use her , Eva decides to use Liam in her plan to take revenge on Jack .
Eva asks Liam to look after some drugs for her , which she took from the evidence room at the police station , however she later takes them back and allows Liam to believe that he has lost them .
Eva tells Liam that she needs a large amount of money to pay the drug dealer , and is frustrated when Liam confides in his older half - sister , Grace Black ( Tamara Wall ) , who is a former gangster .
Eva later explains to Liam that the drug dealer she is dealing with has threatened to kill her , however she will be spared if she murders somebody in return .
Eva then gives Liam a photograph of Jack , and orders him to kill him .
However , after talking to Jack 's cancer - stricken foster daughter Jade Albright ( Kassius Nelson ) , Eva stops Liam from murdering Jack with a car boot lid .
Eva continues her hate campaign against Jack , and on the day of Billy 's funeral , is furious to see Jack laying flowers in his memory .
Eva then charges over to the Osbornes armed with a gun , however Liam contacts Jack and warns him that he is in danger .
Cindy Savage ( Stephanie Waring )
later visits the Osbornes to find that the entire family has vanished without a trace .
Liam is certain that Eva is involved with the disappearance of Jack and his family , but she explains that when she arrived at the Osbornes ' , they had already gone .
Liam later finds a message from Tom Cunningham ( Ellis Hollins ) to his girlfriend
Peri Lomax ( Ruby O'Donnell ) , asking to meet her in the folley , however he keeps this from Eva .
After Cindy phones the police on Liam , believing he knows something about the Osbornes ' disappearance , Eva finds Tom 's message in Liam 's wallet , and is furious that Liam kept it from her , because Tom could have led her to Jack .
When Liam attempts to thwart her plans yet again , Eva records Liam confessing that Grace shot him , and blackmails him into keeping quiet .
She later finds an address for Kim Butterfield ( Daisy Wood - Davis ) , to whom Jack has been transferring money monthly .
She questions Kim , but her interrogation is disrupted by the arrival of Grace and Cindy .
Eva then threatens Liam , saying that if Grace does not leave her to find the Osbornes herself , she will give her recorded confession to the police .
Liam later forgives Eva , and they continue their relationship , but she is still intent on finding the Osbornes .
She is thrilled when Tegan Lomax ( Jessica Ellis ) informs her that Kim had visited the hospital in search of medication , and so Eva puts all hospitals in the borough on alert .
She is called to one hospital where Jack 's son , Darren Osborne ( Ashley Taylor Dawson ) , has brought his wife Nancy ( Jessica Fox ) , but is frustrated to find that they have vanished .
Eva refuses to give up the search for the family , and is later informed by Peri that Tom is back in the village .
When Tom refuses to reveal the Osbornes ' whereabouts during questioning , Eva threatens to charge him with murdering the Osbornes unless he tells her .
Tom 's former guardian , Sam " O.B. " O'Brien ( Darren Jeffries ) , later promises Eva that he will get Tom to confess .
However , when Eva leaves Tom in a police car momentarily to take her to the Osbornes , O.B. appears and helps Tom escape , with the whole village doubting Eva 's abilities as a detective over the incident , infuriating her .
It is later revealed that O.B. is an ally of Jack 's , and is helping him find out who wants him dead , and he reveals his suspicions of Eva 's motives .
O.B. also shares this with Grace , who worries due to Eva 's relationship with Liam .
Eva continues her quest to find the Osbornes as 2016 comes to an end , and is stunned when she bumps into Jack on New Year 's Eve .
She takes him back to the Osborne household armed with a gun , where Darren , Nancy and Jack 's wife Frankie ( Helen Pearson ) arrive and she holds them all hostage .
It is then revealed that when they were teenagers , Billy was feuding with a local schoolboy and severely beat him up , and taunted Jack to do the same .
Jack kicked the schoolboy , which was the blow that lead to his death .
Jack was then manipulated by the police to get Billy imprisoned , who then manipulated Eva to believe that Jack was responsible for the way her life turned out .
Suddenly , Kim , Grace and Esther arrive and as Jack and Darren attempt to wrestle the gun off Eva , the trigger is pulled and Esther is shot , leaving her in a coma .
Eva goes into hiding , knowing that Grace is after her .
Liam and Jack , who has now been exiled from his family , help Eva to escape the village , which ultimately leads to Liam being banished from his family , too .
Liam remains in contact with Eva , and after convincing his older brother , Adam Donovan ( Jimmy Essex ) to help them financially , Liam leaves the village with Eva .
Elsewhere , Esther regains consciousness in hospital and suffers from post - traumatic amnesia , and orders Grace to get revenge on Eva for shooting her .
At the train station , Eva fears that the police will catch her , but she and Liam manage to board the train .
However , after Liam leaves for a moment , he returns to find Eva seemingly sleeping , but finds the back of her head bleeding and realises that she is dead .
Grace is then shown leaving the train station , having shot Eva in the back of the head for what she did to Esther .
An investigation into Eva 's murder is then underway , with Liam working with D.S. Geoff Thorpe ( James Bradshaw ) to bring Grace down .
Liam is later devastated when D.S. Thorpe reveals that Eva was pregnant with his baby when she died , making him more determined to get a confession out of Grace .
The character and casting was announced on 18 August 2016 .
Her backstory states that she " drifted in and out of care homes " due to her father , Billy , disappearing and her mother dying at a young age .
This transformed Eva into " an angry tearaway " , until she joined the police force .
Eva eventually found her father , but comes to the village looking for the person who kept them apart in order to take revenge on them .
The character left the series in scenes that aired on 17 January 2017 .
Eva was killed off when Grace murdered her while Eva and Liam were travelling on a train .
Her departure had been teased through the show 's social media platforms on 16 January .
On her departure , Bennett said " I 've had such an amazing time and felt so welcomed and supported from the start .
I 'm sad to be leaving -
six months has flown by way too fast - but it feels awesome to have been involved in such a great storyline on such a fabulous production . "
GOLDIE MCQUEEN Section::::Goldie McQueen .
Goldie McQueen , played by former Waterloo Road actress Chelsee Healey , made her first on screen appearance on 9 November 2016 .
Goldie was introduced as a new member of the McQueen family .
Healey had previously been announced to be joining the show on 16 July 2016 , when she confirmed the news on social media and was spotted reading through a script on the show 's set , but details of her character were not announced until 26 July 2016 .
Of her casting , Healey said , " I am absolutely thrilled to join Hollyoaks .
I 've grown up watching it so to be in it
is unbelievable .
It was an irresistible opportunity , especially to play this character . "
It was confirmed that Goldie would be joined by her 15-year - old twin sons , Prince and Hunter ( Malique Thompson - Dwyer and Theo Graham ) .
Goldie and her sons arrive in search of their " posh and distant relatives " Myra McQueen ( Nicole Barber - Lane ) , Mercedes McQueen ( Jennifer Metcalfe ) and John Paul McQueen ( James Sutton ) , who are not pleased by their arrival .
Goldie was billed as a " tough , gobby and absolutely shameless [ ... ]
good old - fashioned McQueen " that would " never back down in a fight " and always get involved in a scam to earn quick money .
A show spokesperson said that Goldie would arrive in the village " in the hope of mooching off the family she 's scarcely had anything to do with " , but that the only thing she cares about more than money is her children , who she had when she was a teenager .
Healey expressed her disbelief at playing a mother , but stated that Thompson - Dwyer and Graham were " fantastic to work with " and that all three were " delighted " by the new family unit .
She also compared the wardrobe to her younger self 's wardrobe .
Healey 's pregnancy and temporary departure from the series was announced on 21 January 2017 .
Show producers created storylines to allow Healey absence from the show , but promised " plenty of drama " for Goldie before she leaves .
The character departed on 4 July 2017 after deciding to take the blame for a robbery that Prince committed , before escaping court and fleeing the village .
Healey departed alongside Metcalfe , who also took maternity leave from her role as Mercedes .
Goldie returned in February 2018 for two episodes and full - time in March .
In August 2017 , Healey was longlisted for Funniest Female at the Inside Soap Awards .
She did not progress to the viewer - voted shortlist .
Goldie arrives in Hollyoaks , but Myra is against letting her stay because she is troublesome .
When she is kicked out , she brings Prince and Hunter to the village and Myra allows them to move in with her .
Goldie and the McQueens are devastated when relative Celine McQueen ( Sarah George ) goes missing and this draws Goldie and Celine 's boyfriend Jesse Donovan ( Luke Jerdy ) closer .
They kiss but agree to remain friends .
The McQueens are devastated when Celine is later found dead after being murdered by Cameron Campbell ( Cameron Moore ) .
Goldie videos Mercedes and Ryan Knight ( Duncan James ) kissing , and uses this to blackmail Ryan to not charge Prince and Hunter for stealing Harry Thompson ( Parry Glasspool ) engagement ring .
Mercedes finds out and forces Goldie to delete it , she does but restores the video .
Goldie uses this to blackmail Ryan .
Her cousin , John Paul , discovers the video .
Goldie is surprised when her ex - boyfriend and Prince and Hunter 's father , Shane Sweeney ( Lanre Malaolu ) arrives in the village , having been released from prison .
Shane reveals he and Goldie met when she worked as a stripper and announces his intentions to reconcile with his sons and Goldie , and she accepts .
TABITHA MAXWELL - BROWN Section::::Tabitha Maxwell - Brown .
Tabitha " Tabby " Maxwell - Brown , played by Linda Gray , made her first on screen appearance on 15 November 2016 .
She is the mother of Marnie Nightingale ( Lysette Anthony ) and appeared for a guest stint in November 2016 .
The character was reintroduced for a longer stint in early 2017 .
The character and casting was announced on 17 August 2016 .
Gray previously played Sue Ellen Ewing in the American soap Dallas .
Tabitha " whips up a storm just like Sue Ellen did " when she arrives , following the death of her husband , and is said to have " fierce and affectionate bond " with Marnie , although she will not be a fan of her ex - husband , Mac Nightingale ( David Easter ) .
Executive producer , Bryan Kirkwood , decided to cast Gray after watching episodes of Dallas with his husband .
On her casting , Gray said , " I love England
, I read the script , she 's feisty , I love the feisty ones .
My motto is ' choose wisely ' - and I think I 've chosen wisely .
"
Gray signed up to appear in the show for an initial one - week run .
Daniel Kilkelly from Digital Spy described the character as having many stories of her " fabulous lifestyle " but is actually " lonely and harbours hurt feelings " because she is now so distant from the rest of her family .
Kilkelly described Gray 's casting as " Soapland 's casting coup of the year " .
Gray began filming on 17 September 2016 .
Kirkwood said in October 2016 that he would like Gray to join the show on a more permanent basis and revealed that the show and Gray had had conversations on her returning .
He said , " The conversations are continuing and she feels like a really natural member of the Nightingale family .
If you look at the linear between her , Marnie and Ellie - all three of them are all stunning women
and I believe in it .
I believe she is part of that family . "
On 14 December 2016 , it was announced that Gray would return to the cast as a semi - regular character .
A show spokesperson said , " Everyone loved having Linda around last year and we ca n't wait to see her back .
She 's due back on set in Liverpool next week and is looking forward to working with her on - screen family again .
"
Gray returned to filming on 10 January 2017 and was later spotted filming an unknown family member 's funeral .
PRINCE MCQUEEN
Section::::Prince McQueen .
Prince McQueen , played by Malique Thompson - Dwyer , made his first on screen appearance on 17 November 2016 as the son of Goldie McQueen ( Chelsee Healey ) .
The character and casting was announced on 26 July 2016 alongside that of his mother Goldie and twin brother Hunter ( Theo Graham ) .
Prince was described as a " cocky and swaggering " 15-year old who has " confidence in spades and more front than Blackpool " .
He was billed as having " a rebellious and adventurous spirit " causing him to " live in the moment " , but also has trouble " listening to authority " , something that Sophie Dainty of Digital Spy described as " a trait that seems to run in the McQueen family . "
Healey said that she , Thompson - Dwyer and Graham were overjoyed by their family unit .
Lily Drinkwell ( Lauren McQueen ) was introduced as a new love interest for Prince in January 2017 .
McQueen commented that Lily and Prince were total opposites and that no one would think to put them together .
In August 2017 , Thompson - Dwyer and McQueen were longlisted for Best Partnership at the Inside Soap Awards .
They did not progress to the viewer - voted shortlist .
In March 2018 , Prince and Lily got married , despite Lily 's aunt Diane O'Connor and Prince 's father Shane Sweeney attempting to stop the wedding from taking place .
They move into the flat above Price Slice .
They eventually argue about money and heating .
HUNTER MCQUEEN Section::::Hunter McQueen .
Hunter McQueen , played by Theo Graham , made his first on screen appearance on 17 November 2016 as the son of Goldie McQueen ( Chelsee Healey ) .
The character and casting was announced on 26 July 2016 alongside that of his mother Goldie and twin brother Prince
( Malique Thompson - Dwyer ) .
Hunter was billed as the " more sensitive twin " who believes himself to be a graffiti artist .
He is a " creative and free spirited " 15-year old who " tries his best to stay out of trouble " , something " easier said than done " due to Prince 's rebellious nature .
Healey said that she , Thompson - Dwyer and Graham were " delighted " by their " new family unit " .
In August 2017 , Graham was longlisted for Best Newcomer at the Inside Soap Awards .
He did not progress to the viewer - voted shortlist .
In October 2018 , it was announced that Graham would be departing from the show .
DR .
BARTON Section::::Dr .
Barton .
Dr. Barton , played by Amanda Muggleton , made her appearance on 13 December 2016 .
The character and casting was announced on 9 December 2016 .
Dr. Barton is the doctor that Darren Osborne ( Ashley Taylor Dawson ) takes Nancy Osborne ( Jessica Fox ) to after she begins to feel unwell after they suspect that she is suffering from multiple sclerosis .
OTHER CHARACTERS
Section::::Other characters .
!
scope="col " Character ! scope="col " Date(s ) ! scope="col " Actor ! scope="col " Circumstances !
scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " Evans !
scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Characters and cast at Channel 4