DUNKIRK ( 2017 FILM )
Dunkirk is a 2017 war film written , directed , and produced by Christopher Nolan that depicts the Dunkirk evacuation of World War II .
Its ensemble cast includes Fionn Whitehead , Tom Glynn - Carney , Jack Lowden , Harry Styles , Aneurin Barnard , James D'Arcy , Barry Keoghan , Kenneth Branagh , Cillian Murphy , Mark Rylance , and Tom Hardy .
The film is a British - American - French - Dutch co - production , and was distributed by
Warner Bros. Dunkirk portrays the evacuation from three perspectives : land , sea , and air .
It has little dialogue , as Nolan sought instead to create suspense from cinematography and music .
Filming began in May 2016 in Dunkirk and ended that September in Los Angeles , when post - production began .
Cinematographer Hoyte van Hoytema shot the film on IMAX 65 mm and 65 mm large - format film stock .
Dunkirk has extensive practical effects , and employed thousands of extras as well as historic boats from the evacuation , and period aeroplanes .
The film premiered on 13 July 2017 at Odeon Leicester Square in London , and was released in the United Kingdom and the United States on 21 July in IMAX , 70 mm , and 35 mm film formats .
It is the highest - grossing World War II film , taking $ 527 million worldwide .
Dunkirk received praise for its screenplay , direction , musical score , and cinematography ; some critics called it Nolan 's best work , and one of the greatest war films .
The film received eight nominations at the 23rd Critics ' Choice Awards , winning for Best Editing , eight at the 71st British Academy Film Awards , winning for Best Sound , and three at the 75th Golden Globe Awards .
At the 90th Academy Awards , it received eight nominations , including Best Picture and Best Director ( Nolan 's first Oscar nomination for directing ) ; it went on to win for Best Sound Editing , Best Sound Mixing , and Best Film Editing .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1940 , during the Battle of France , hundreds of thousands of Allied soldiers have retreated to Dunkirk .
Tommy , a young British private , is the sole survivor of a German ambush .
At the beach , he finds thousands of troops awaiting evacuation and meets Gibson , who is burying a body .
After a German dive - bomber attack , they find a wounded man .
They rush his stretcher onto a hospital ship , hoping to remain aboard , but are ordered off .
The ship is sunk by dive bombers ; Tommy helps another soldier , Alex , out of the water .
They leave at night on a destroyer , but it is sunk by a U - boat .
Gibson saves Tommy and Alex from the sinking ship , and they get back to the beach .
With only a single , vulnerable mole available for mooring deep - draft ships , the Royal Navy requisitions civilian vessels in the UK that can get to the beach .
In Weymouth , a civilian sailor Dawson and his son Peter set out on his boat Moonstone , rather than let the Navy commandeer her .
Impulsively , Peter 's teenage friend George joins them .
At sea , they rescue a shivering shell - shocked soldier from a wrecked ship .
When he realises that Dawson is sailing for Dunkirk , the soldier demands that they turn back and tries to wrest control of the boat ; in the struggle , George falls and suffers a head injury that renders him blind .
Three Spitfires cross the English Channel , heading towards Dunkirk .
After their leader is shot down in a dogfight , one of the pilots , Farrier , assumes command , although his fuel gauge is shattered .
They save a minesweeper from a German Heinkel
He 111 bomber , but the other Spitfire is hit and ditches .
Its pilot , Collins , is rescued by Moonstone .
Tommy , Alex and Gibson join some soldiers from a Highlanders regiment and hide inside a trawler that is beached outside the Allied perimeter .
German troops shoot at the boat , and water enters through the bullet holes .
Alex , hoping to lighten the boat , accuses Gibson , who has been silent throughout , of being a German spy , and demands that he leave .
Gibson reveals he is French ; he stole the identity of the dead soldier he buried , hoping to be evacuated with the British .
The group abandons the fishing boat when it begins to sink .
Gibson is unable to get out and drowns .
Alex and Tommy swim towards a nearby destroyer , but it is sunk by a bomber .
Moonstone manoeuvres to take on those in the water , including Alex and Tommy .
Peter discovers that George is dead ; when asked by the shell - shocked soldier , he lies that George is fine .
Farrier shoots down the bomber before his fuel runs out .
Gliding over the beach , he shoots down a dive - bomber , and then lands beyond the perimeter .
He sets fire to his plane and is then taken prisoner .
At the beach , Royal Navy Commander Bolton watches the last British soldiers leave .
He notes that nearly 300,000 have been evacuated , ten times more than Prime Minister Winston Churchill had hoped for .
He remains to oversee the evacuation of the French .
Arriving back in Weymouth , Dawson is congratulated for having saved so many men .
The shell - shocked soldier sees George 's body being carried away .
Peter goes to the local newspaper ; a front - page article later commends George as a hero .
Alex and Tommy board a train , and Alex expects public hostility as the train approaches Woking , but they receive a hero 's welcome instead .
CAST PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Director Christopher Nolan conceived the film in the mid-1990s , when he and his future wife Emma Thomas sailed across the English Channel , following the path of many small boats in the Dunkirk evacuation .
Nolan considered improvising the entire film instead of writing a script , but Thomas convinced him otherwise .
In 2015 , Nolan wrote a 76-page screenplay , which was about half the length of his usual scripts and his shortest to date .
Its precise structure necessitated fictional characters , rather than ones based on eyewitnesses .
The story is told from three perspectives — land ( one week of action ) , sea ( one day of action ) , and air ( one hour of action ) .
Nolan structured the film from the point of view of the characters , intending to use visuals rather than dialogue and backstory .
He wanted to incorporate the so - called " snowball effect " that he had previously used only in the third acts of his other films .
Nolan said that he approached research as though it were for a documentary , and was attracted to the project because of its inversion of the " Hollywood formula " : the Battle of Dunkirk was not a victory and did not involve American armed forces , but nevertheless demanded a large - scale production to be put on screen .
Nolan postponed Dunkirk until he had acquired sufficient experience directing large - scale action films .
To convey the perspective of soldiers on the beach , for whom contact with the enemy was " extremely limited and intermittent " , he did not show Germans on screen .
He omitted scenes with Winston Churchill and the generals in war rooms , as he did not want to get " bogged down in the politics of the situation " .
Nolan showed key members of the crew eleven films that had inspired him : All Quiet on the Western Front ( 1930 ) , The Wages of Fear ( 1953 ) , Alien ( 1979 ) , Speed ( 1994 ) , Unstoppable ( 2010 ) , Greed ( 1924 ) , ( 1927 ) , Ryan 's Daughter ( 1970 ) , The Battle of Algiers ( 1966 ) , Chariots of Fire ( 1981 ) , and Foreign Correspondent ( 1940 ) – only two of which are war films .
The historical consultant was author Joshua Levine , who also wrote the book adaptation , Dunkirk : The History Behind the Major Motion Picture .
Levine accompanied Nolan while interviewing veterans .
During these interviews , Nolan was told a story of soldiers seen walking into the sea in desperation , which he incorporated into the screenplay .
The production team and scouting locations were chosen before Nolan and Thomas solicited Warner Bros. Pictures to make the film .
Nolan and his production designer Nathan Crowley toured the beach of Dunkirk while location scouting , and decided to film there despite the logistical challenges , discarding Suffolk as an alternative .
Crowley set up a makeshift art department in Nolan 's old garage , as is tradition , and colourised black - and - white photographs to better understand the visual representation .
The design aesthetic was made to look as contemporary as possible .
Hoyte van Hoytema , who had previously collaborated with Nolan on Interstellar , was chosen as the director of photography .
The Hollywood Reporter stated that Nolan made a deal with Warner Bros. to receive a $ 20 million salary plus 20 % of the box office gross ; however , Vanity Fair reported that Nolan agreed to receive a low upfront salary in exchange for a large backend percentage .
Pre - production began in January 2016 .
For the uniforms , costume designer Jeffrey Kurland aimed to balance historical accuracy with aesthetics that would favour the film stock .
As the original heavy wool fabric had not been produced since 1940 , it was made from scratch , tailored for the main cast and over a thousand extras .
Uniforms were made in a factory in Pakistan and the boots by a shoemaker in Mexico .
The costume department then spent three weeks ageing them at Longcross Studios .
Each garment was made to look distinct in regiment and personality : Tommy wears a large greatcoat , while Alex dons the Highlander cut .
Kurland found references at museums , in contemporary magazines , photo archives , and books .
The mole was rebuilt over four months from the original blueprints .
Sand was brought from Dunkirk to create make - up consistent with the environment .
Oil and tar were specially made and prosthetics were water and fire resistant .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
After first - hand accounts of the evacuation revealed how young and inexperienced the soldiers had been , Nolan decided to cast young and unknown actors for the beach setting .
He was also adamant that all of the cast be British .
John Papsidera and Toby Whale were the casting directors for Dunkirk .
Tom Hardy , Kenneth Branagh , and Mark Rylance were in talks to join the ensemble as supporting characters in late 2015 .
Fionn Whitehead was cast as the lead in March 2016 , while Jack Lowden , Aneurin Barnard , and Harry Styles were added shortly after .
Cillian Murphy joined the following month .
James D'Arcy , Barry Keoghan , and Tom Glynn - Carney were included later that May. Michael Caine was cast in a spoken cameo role as Fortis Leader , as a nod to his role in the film Battle of Britain ( 1969 ) .
According to D'Arcy and Nolan , Winnant and Bolton act as a Greek chorus to give the audience context .
Whitehead went through a secretive auditioning process lasting several months .
His character was named after the slang term for the ordinary British soldier .
Styles was cast for his " old fashioned face " , as stated by Nolan .
He won the role after auditioning against hundreds of candidates , when Nolan was unaware of his renown as a singer .
Murphy spoke to Nolan and read about the psychological trauma the soldiers endured , to understand his character 's PTSD .
Nolan chose Rylance for his work in the theatre and performance in Wolf Hall .
As research , Rylance piloted his character 's boat every day , listened to audio recordings at the Imperial War Museum , and read accounts of men like Mr Dawson .
Between takes , he encouraged rehearsal through improvised scenes , which Nolan said " deepened the characterizations " .
John Nolan , uncle of Christopher , played Blind Man .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography commenced on 23 May 2016 in Dunkirk , planned so as to avoid Bastille Day and coincide with the dates of the real evacuation .
Production continued for four weeks in Urk , Netherlands , one week in Swanage and Weymouth in Dorset , United Kingdom , and for two weeks at the Point Vicente Interpretive Center and Lighthouse in Rancho Palos Verdes , California .
Filming in Dunkirk took place at the location of the real evacuation , while the street scenes were shot in nearby Malo - les - Bains because most of the buildings in Dunkirk were destroyed in the war .
Shooting times on the beach and mole were determined by tidal patterns .
French labour strikes and working time regulations also affected the schedule .
To minimise the need for computer - generated imagery ( CGI ) , cardboard cut - out props of soldiers and military vehicles created the illusion of a large army .
Real or scale model fighter aircraft , and real warships and private boats , provided realism that could not be achieved from CGI .
Scale models were created via 3D printing .
The mole set was frequently rebuilt after being damaged by bad weather .
Because French authorities had prohibited pyrotechnic charges , to protect marine life , air cannons were used instead .
Six thousand extras were needed in France .
Early scenes of the film were shot at Weymouth harbour , and the final scenes at Swanage railway station .
Universal Pictures ' Falls Lake studio in Los Angeles was used for interior and exterior sets of a sinking ship and plane , with the ship interiors filmed in a water tank using stuntmen .
To get acclimatised to the cold water scenes , Styles and Whitehead underwent training sessions at Point Dume in Malibu , California .
The principal cast members did their own stunts .
Crowley and marine coordinator Neil Andrea located nearly sixty ships , which Nolan had reconditioned for the shoot .
These included the retired French Navy destroyer , which was made to look like a 1940 British warship as there were no wartime British destroyers left with working engines .
Three retired Royal Netherlands Navy ships were also used : the minesweeper portrayed , portrayed and , and MLV Castor ( a Royal Netherlands Navy armed pilot vessel ) portrayed .
The motor torpedo boat MTB 102 and the 1930s
Norwegian steamer Rogaland were also used .
Over fifty other boats included twenty actual Little Ships of Dunkirk , piloted by their owners .
A small 1930s motor yacht called Moonstone served for six weeks of filming ; its most demanding scenes , with up to sixty people on a boat designed for fewer than ten , were shot on
the Dutch lake IJsselmeer to avoid the challenge of the Dunkirk tides .
Aircraft were equipped with dual cockpits for filming in flight .
A Yakovlev Yak-52TW was modified to resemble a Supermarine Spitfire , and two Supermarine Spitfire Mark IAs , a Spitfire Mark VB , and a Hispano Buchon painted to look like a Messerschmitt Bf 109E , were also used for the combat scenes .
Large - scale radio controlled model aircraft , including Heinkel He 111 and Junkers Ju 87 bombers , were filmed crashing into the English Channel .
The real Spitfires were provided by the Imperial War Museum Duxford , and owner Dan Friedkin piloted the one that was shot landing on the beach in Dunkirk .
These takes had to be done within forty - five minutes , before the tide came back in .
IMAX cameras were attached to the fighter planes using specially made snorkel and periscope lenses – in the back and the front – and large - scale mockups were submerged with cable rigs for a crash scene .
Scroggins Aviation and Gateguards UK performed period aviation reconstruction .
A Piper Aerostar enabled filming from the air , also with IMAX cameras front and rear .
Dogfights over the Channel were shot by an aerial unit based at Lee - on - Solent Airfield .
Hardy and Lowden spent the final stages of the shooting schedule on a cliffside in Palos Verdes , inside purpose - built cockpit gimbals , with limited contact with the rest of the cast and crew .
Principal photography ended on 2 September 2016 , after sixty - eight days .
The film was shot in natural lighting using both IMAX 65 mm and 65 mm large format film stock in Panavision System 65 , with more IMAX footage than in any of Nolan 's previous films – an estimated seventy - five percent .
The sparsity of dialogue made it possible for IMAX cameras , which are notoriously noisy , to be used as the primary format .
Panavision and IMAX lenses enabled filming at night .
For the first time in a feature film , IMAX cameras were used hand - held , which Steven Spielberg and Ron Howard advised as the best way to shoot on vessels .
POST - PRODUCTION Section::::Post - production .
Nolan 's regular collaborator Lee Smith returned to edit Dunkirk , beginning in September 2016 after Smith had assembled shots unsupervised while filming was still in progress .
Editing took place in Los Angeles with an audio mixing team of eight people .
Nolan said : " You stop seeing the wood for the trees " , and singled out the editing of the aerial sequences as a particular challenge , likening this to a chess game .
Limited computer - generated imagery was applied to improve some scenes , but none consisted entirely of CGI .
Weather continuity presented less of a challenge than was expected , with filming both in Europe and California .
At least ten to fifteen feature - length versions were cut to further refine the dramatic impact .
Once a cut was completed , only then did they apply music .
Post - production had fifty - four hours of raw footage to work with .
The only usable sounds from production recordings were voices – everything else was recreated .
Sound designer Richard King sent two sound mixers to audio record the Spitfires at the Imperial War Museum Duxford using twenty - four microphones .
Unable to find an actual dive siren of a Stuka dive bomber , King reverse engineered one from old photographs in an attempt to replicate the sound .
For scenes in which ships gave out sounds of people in distress , voices were captured using an ADR " loop group " .
C-4 and liquid propane were blown up to record sound for the explosions .
Also featured were the whistles attributed to German bombs during the Second World War .
Bomb noises were made to increase in pitch the closer they got to impact , to stay true to reality .
Double Negative undertook the visual effects work while FotoKem , which assisted as the production 's film laboratory , also handled the release prints .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Hans Zimmer began working on the score in 2016 , continued for eleven months , and eventually created a 100-minute demo .
For intensity , the script was written to accommodate the auditory illusion of a Shepard tone , which had previously been explored in Nolan 's 2006 film The Prestige .
This was coupled with the sound of Nolan 's own pocket watch , which he recorded and sent to Zimmer to be synthesised .
Additional music was provided by Lorne Balfe , Andrew Kawczynski , Steve Mazzaro , and Benjamin Wallfisch .
" Nimrod " from Edward Elgar 's Enigma Variations is part of the theme , which was slowed down to six beats per minute with added bass notes to avoid it sounding sentimental .
Instrumentation included a double bass and fourteen cellos played in high register .
King relayed to Zimmer the sound of a boat engine , which served as a reference for the tempo .
Zimmer visited the Dunkirk set for inspiration , taking back a jar of sand , and chose not to view raw footage whilst composing the score .
The music was recorded at AIR Lyndhurst Hall in London with Geoff Foster as mix engineer .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The world premiere was on 13 July 2017 at Odeon Leicester Square in London .
The film was theatrically released on 21 July , projected on IMAX , 70 mm and 35 mm film .
It is the fourth Nolan film to be released in the third week of July , a period in which Warner Bros. Pictures has previously achieved success .
It was Nolan 's preference that the film opened in July instead of the northern - hemisphere autumn awards season .
The film was initially screened in 125 theatres in 70 mm , the widest release in that format in twenty - five years .
Dunkirk received a special IMAX screening at the 2017 Toronto International Film Festival , the first Nolan film to appear at the festival since Following , nineteen years earlier .
After its original release of 126 days , the film was re - released in fifty IMAX and 70 mm theatres on 1 December , expanding to 250 additional cities in January 2018 .
Dunkirk was released digitally on 12 December 2017 , and on 4 K Ultra HD , Blu - ray , and DVD on 18 December in the United Kingdom and 19 December in the United States .
MARKETING Section::::Marketing .
The announcement teaser debuted in cinemas ahead of Suicide Squad and was released online on 4 August 2016 .
According to data analytics firm ListenFirst Media , it generated the most Twitter engagement of any trailer released that week .
The first full - length trailer was released on 14 December 2016 , alongside a five - minute cinema - exclusive prologue shown before selected IMAX screenings of .
Dunkirk was the most discussed film that week according to media measurement firm comScore .
The prologue returned for a week before selected IMAX showings of .
Footage from the film was well received at CinemaCon 2017 .
Warner Bros. aired a TV spot to coincide with the 2017 US national basketball playoffs .
The official trailer was released on 5 May 2017 , after a countdown on the film 's website and four 15-second teasers leading up to it .
Dunkirk was again the most discussed film that week according to ComScore .
The video game developer Wargaming included in its titles World of Tanks , World of Warships and World of Warplanes missions and rewards related to the film .
On 6 July , Warner Bros. released another trailer , which for the third time was the most discussed film of the week .
The prologue was shown at selected Wonder Woman IMAX screenings in July .
It also toured nine cities in three European countries with a mobile cinema .
Sue Kroll , president of Warner Bros. Worldwide Marketing and Distribution , said that it was important that Dunkirk be marketed as a summer event movie as opposed to a period war film , to highlight its " magnificent scale and originality " .
This strategy was maintained throughout the campaign .
To convince audiences that the film was best experienced in theatres , the prologue was never made available online .
TV spots were distributed sporadically during sports games and notable television series to establish the film 's themes .
Social media infographics described the scale and importance of the Dunkirk evacuation .
Additionally , a Google 360 Experience interactive adventure , an Amazon Alexa programme , and a 360-degree short film , were created .
In partnership with fast food restaurant Carl 's Jr. , the film was branded on four million cups , as well as pop - ups at nearly 3,000 locations .
Research saw the film appeal to twenty percent of infrequent moviegoers .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Dunkirk grossed $ 190.1 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 337.2 million in other countries , for a worldwide total of $ 527.3 million , against a production budget of $ 100–150 million .
Globally , it is the highest - grossing World War II film ( not adjusting for inflation ) , surpassing Saving Private Ryans $ 481.8 million .
In the United States and Canada , industry tracking for the opening weekend ranged from Varietys $ 30–40 million to Deadline Hollywoods $ 35 million , while BoxOffice speculated an opening weekend of $ 55 million , and IndieWire $ 50 million and $ 500 million worldwide .
Dunkirk made $ 19.8 million on its first day , including $ 5.5 million from preview screenings .
It went on to finish first at the box office with $ 50.1 million , marking the third - largest opening for a World War II film ( behind s $ 62.1 million and Pearl Harbors $ 59.1 million ) , as well as the fourth largest of Nolan 's career .
In its second weekend , it grossed $ 26.6 million ( a drop of 44.3 % ) , beating newcomer The Emoji Movie to the top spot .
The film grossed $ 17.1 million in its third weekend , second to newcomer The Dark Tower ( $ 19.2 million ) , and was again second in its fourth week , behind with $ 10.9 million .
The film opened in France on 19 July 2017 , and made $ 2.2 million on its first day .
It was released in seven markets the following day , earning an additional $ 6.3 million , and on 21 July in forty - six more countries , grossing $ 12.7 million from over ten thousand theatres , including $ 3.7 million from the United Kingdom .
The international debut totalled $ 55.4 million , including $ 4.9 million in France , $ 12.4 million in the UK and $ 10.3 million in Korea .
The film remained number one in the United Kingdom for five weeks .
It opened in China on 1 September in the top spot , grossing $ 30 million from its weekend debut .
Its opening weekend in Japan earned $ 2.9 million from 444 screens .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Dunkirk received praise for its screenplay , direction , musical score , and cinematography .
Some critics called it Nolan 's best film to date and one of the greatest war films ever made .
On the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 92 % based on 397 reviews , with an average of 8.7/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads : " Dunkirk serves up emotionally satisfying spectacle , delivered by a writer - director in full command of his craft and brought to life by a gifted ensemble cast that honors the fact - based story . "
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 94 out of 100 based on reviews from 53 critics , indicating " universal acclaim " .
According to MRQE , it has an average rating of 85/100 , based on 127 critics .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A− " on an A+ to F scale , while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave it an 88 % overall positive score .
Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian awarded the film five out of five and called it Nolan 's best to date , saying that he " surrounds his audience with chaos and horror from the outset , and amazing images and dazzlingly accomplished set pieces on a huge 70 mm screen , particularly the pontoon crammed with soldiers extending into the churning sea , exposed to enemy aircraft " .
Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter also lauded the film , calling it " an impressionist masterpiece " that was " deeply moving " but without " manufactured sentimentality or false heroics . "
He also praised the score , which " enormously strengthens the film " and " incorporates both sound and music to extraordinary effect " .
Peter Debruge of Variety praised the plot ( although calling Zimmer 's score " bombastic " ) , writing : " [ Nolan has ] delivered all the spectacle of a big - screen tentpole , ratcheting up both the tension and heroism through his intricate and occasionally overwhelming sound design . "
Manohla Dargis of The New York Times described the film as a " tour de force of cinematic craft and technique " and lauded Nolan 's elastic approach to narrative .
Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle called it a " triumph " and " masterpiece " , commending Nolan 's unique approach to directing a war film and praising the performances .
The Economist labelled Dunkirk " a remarkable film " and a new classic .
Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun - Times gave the film four out of four and said it was one of the best war movies of the decade , describing it as " tight , gripping , deeply involving and unforgettable ...
triumph in filmmaking " .
Chris Nashawaty of Entertainment Weekly gave the film an " A " , calling it the best of 2017 : " By the end of Dunkirk , what stands out the most is n't its inspirational message or everyday heroism .
It 's the small indelible , unshakeable images that accumulate like the details in the corner of a mural . "
Robbie Collin of The Daily Telegraph gave the film five out of five , lauding it as " a work of heart - hammering intensity and grandeur " .
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone awarded it his first four - star rating of 2017 as " maybe the greatest war film ever " , adding : " There 's little doubt that [ Nolan ] has , without sentimentality or sanctimony , raised [ the survival film ]
genre to the level of art ...
with the resonant force of an enduring screen classic . "
He also called it the first major Oscar contender of the year .
Michael Medved awarded it four out of four and called Hardy 's performance " outstanding " , and the action " seamless " , declaring : " This is not only the best WWII movie since Saving Private Ryan , it is very simply one of the greatest war movies ever made . "
Matt Zoller Seitz of RogerEbert.com gave it a score of three and a half out of four , despite not liking the film , stating that he " loathed parts of it and found other parts repetitious or half - baked .
But , maybe paradoxically , I admired it throughout , and have been thinking about it constantly . "
Jacques Mandelbaum of Le Monde praised the film 's realism , but was disappointed that it ignores the part played by French troops .
Kevin Maher in The Times gave it two out of five , saying : "
[ Dunkirk ] is 106 clamorous minutes of big - screen bombast that 's so concerned with its own spectacle and scale that it neglects to deliver the most crucial element — drama . "
He also suggested that Dunkirk felt like a Call of Duty video game .
David Cox of The Guardian felt the film had historical inaccuracies , a paucity of female characters , small scale , a thinly characterised cast and lack of suspense .
In a literary review for the London Review of Books , Michael Wood compared it to the films of Luis Buñuel and commended Zimmer 's soundtrack as an effective match to the film .
In 2018 , The Washington Post named Dunkirk among the " 23 best films of the 2000s " . ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
The film received the Best Editing award at the 23rd Critics ' Choice Awards , and seven further nominations : for Best Picture , Best Director , Best Acting Ensemble , Best Cinematography , Best Visual Effects , Best Score , and Best Production Design .
It also won the Best Sound award at the 71st British Academy Film Awards as well as seven nominations : for Best Film , Best Direction , Best Original Music , Best Cinematography , Best Editing , Best Production Design , and Best Special Visual Effects .
At the 75th Golden Globe Awards , it received three nominations , for Best Motion Picture – Drama , Best Director , and Best Original Score .
At the 90th Academy Awards , it was awarded Best Sound Editing , Best Sound Mixing , and Best Film Editing , with five further nominations for Best Picture , Best Director , Best Cinematography , Best Original Score , and Best Production Design .
HISTORICAL ACCURACY Section::::Historical accuracy .
The film was noted for its generally realistic representation of the historical evacuation .
It accurately depicts a few Royal Air Force planes dogfighting the Luftwaffe over the sea , limited to one hour of operation by their fuel capacity .
In 1940 , destroyers and fighter planes were indeed held back from battle , as the Royal Navy and Air Force would have been the sole defenders against invasion .
Also noted were the accurate depictions of how a small boat attempted to evade aerial attack , and of how soldiers returning to England saw a civilian population largely unaware of or unaffected by the war .
British officers did initially refuse to evacuate French soldiers , although Churchill later insisted that the French be evacuated alongside the British .
The overall realism of the film was acknowledged by surviving Dunkirk veterans , although Branagh said that some thought it was " louder than the battle " .
Although some events are based on true history , the characters and the storyline are fictional ; Branagh 's role is a composite character .
When the beach scenes were shot , the weather was worse than during the real evacuation ; Nolan explained that this helped to understand the danger faced by the pleasure boats .
In one scene , an officer gives a salute without wearing his military beret , which a veteran pointed out as inaccurate protocol .
To differentiate the German planes , their noses were painted yellow ; this was not actually done until a month after Dunkirk .
The involvement of French , African , and Indian soldiers was either limited or left out .
Contemporary shots were used for aerial views of the town , whereas in reality Dunkirk was substantially in ruins by the time of the evacuation .
The design of the airborne leaflet propaganda was similar to those used in 1940 , although the originals were not in colour .
NOTES SEE
ALSO
* Dunkirk ( 1958 film )
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
EXTERNAL
LINKS * Dunkirk at History vs. Hollywood