A STREET CAT NAMED BOB ( FILM )
A Street Cat Named Bob is a 2016 British biographical drama film directed by Roger Spottiswoode and written by Tim John and Maria Nation .
It is based on the book of same name and The World
According to Bob by James Bowen .
The film stars Luke Treadaway , Ruta Gedmintas , Joanne Froggatt , Anthony Head and Bob
the Cat as himself .
The film premiered in London on 3 November 2016 , followed by a general release the next day .
The film won Best British Film at the U.K. National Film Awards on 29 March 2017 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
James Bowen is a homeless man and former heroin addict , living on the streets of London down to his last bits of change .
After a life threatening drug - related incident , his support worker
Val , in an attempt to get him off the street , gets him into a council flat and prescribes him methadone .
On his first night in his flat , James discovers a cat rifling through his food .
Assuming the cat had escaped from somewhere , James tries to return the cat to his real owners .
After letting him go , the same evening the cat returns to James 's flat , this time with a purulent wound on his back leg .
Worried , James consults his animal - loving but allergic neighbour , Betty .
She informs James of a local charity vet that she volunteers at , and names the cat Bob .
Waiting on a queue at the vet , James misses a meeting with Val .
After the appointment , James later gets Bob neutered and sets him free .
However , Bob keeps following James into town , eventually drawing more crowds of people , making James more wealthy , and he eventually decides to keep Bob .
Bob becomes a tourist hotspot , and James and Betty start to become romantically attached .
One night while returning home , James finds his old friend , Baz , unconscious on his flat estate , overdosed on heroin .
Baz later dies in hospital , and James finds out that Betty can not be around drug addicts , as her deceased brother had been one .
On New Year 's Eve , James makes an impromptu visit to his biological father , Jack , his stepmother , Hilary , and his lost sisters , Pris and Faith .
After Bob destroys their living room , Hilary sends James and Bob out .
One day , while busking , James gets into an argument with a yob , causing the crowd to get in a brawl with the man and James getting arrested for it .
Although found innocent , he is prohibited from busking for 6 months .
While in the chemist , receiving his methadone , Betty notices him .
Betty and James argue and go their separate ways .
Later on , James visits the offices of The Big Issue to make some more money for him and Bob .
He regains his popularity with tourists by selling The Big Issue .
After being accused of illegally selling magazines on another vendor 's patch , James and Bob are banned for a whole month .
After going back in business , James gets into an argument with a woman trying to buy Bob off him , losing Bob in the scuffle .
Bob does not return for a few days , leaving James devastated .
After Bob returns , James feels he is ready to come off the methadone .
After a week of grueling withdrawal symptoms , James awakes , clean and healthy .
A journalist , Mary , requests to write a book about James and Bob after his Internet and media popularity , and James agrees .
James then fixes up his relationship with his father Jack , and his life turns around for the better .
CAST * Luke Treadaway as James Bowen
* Bob as himself .
* Stand - ins for Bob :
Oscar , Booker , Jafffa , Leo , Ricki and Trayce * Ruta Gedmintas as Elizabeth " Betty " Robinson , Bowen 's animal - loving neighbour and James 's love interest .
* Joanne Froggatt as Val , Bowen 's drug support worker .
* Anthony Head as Jack Bowen , Bowen 's remarried father .
* Beth Goddard as Hilary , Bowen 's father 's wife and James 's stepmother .
* Caroline Goodall as Mary , an American journalist who persuades him to write a book about Bob .
* Darren Evans as Baz , James 's old friend who did not recover from heroin addiction .
* Ruth Sheen as Elsie , a kind middle - aged woman , who gives presents to Bob .
* Nina Wadia as Bus Conductress PRODUCTION AND RELEASE Section::::Production and release .
On 24 August 2015 it was announced that Roger Spottiswoode would direct a film based on the book A Street Cat Named Bob by James Bowen , while Tim John scripted the film .
Adam Rolston would produce the film through his Shooting Script Films .
The Exchange sold the film 's international rights .
Maria Nation also wrote the script .
Principal photography on the film began on 25 October 2015 in London , at Twickenham Film Studios and on location in Covent Garden .
Filming wrapped up on 6 December 2015 .
The world premiere of A Street Cat Named Bob took place at the Curzon Mayfair Cinema , London on 3 November 2016 and was attended by HRH The Duchess of Cambridge .
The film opened to the public in the UK on 4 November and in the US on 18 November .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
A Street Cat Named Bob grossed $ 82,703 in the United States and Canada and $ 17,852,881 in other countries for a worldwide total of nearly $ 18 million , against a production budget of $ 8 million .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 77 % based on 56 reviews , with an average score of 5.9/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " A Street Cat Named Bob uses a fact - based feelgood tale as the inspiration for an unapologetically heartwarming movie that should move all but the most cynical of viewers . "
On Metacritic , the film has a score of 54 out of 100 , based on 12 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS AWARDS Section::::Awards and nominations .
Section::::Awards .
National Film Awards
UK
* Best British Film : 2017
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website on Facebook *
( rating 2.5/5 )
* Cats in Film – A Street Cat Named Bob ( 2016 )