HATERS BACK
OFF
Haters Back
Off is a Netflix original television comedy series based on the YouTube character Miranda Sings created by Colleen Ballinger .
Its two seasons were released in October 2016 and 2017 , respectively .
The " surreal and absurd " series centers around the family life of Miranda Sings , a sheltered , self - absorbed , overconfident and untalented young performer who seeks fame on YouTube .
The half - hour episodes depicted Miranda 's road to fame , and the price she pays for trampling on the feelings of others .
The show stars Colleen Ballinger as Miranda , Angela Kinsey as her mother Bethany , Steve Little as her uncle Jim , Francesca Reale as her sister Emily , and Erik Stocklin as her best friend and love interest , Patrick .
Season 2 added Matt Besser as Miranda 's estranged father .
Netflix described the show as " a bizarre family comedy , and a commentary on society today and our fascination with fame . "
The series was developed by Colleen Ballinger and her brother , Christopher Ballinger , together with showrunners Gigi McCreery and Perry Rein .
It was produced by Brightlight Pictures .
The show was named for Miranda Sings ' signature catchphrase that she uses when responding to negative comments on her YouTube videos .
Haters Back
Off was one of the first scripted series created by a YouTube personality .
The first season was released on October 14 , 2016 .
It follows Miranda from the time she uploads her first video until one of her videos goes viral .
The second season was released on October 20 , 2017 .
It concerns Miranda 's schemes to raise money from fans , leading to her family 's financial ruin and her 15 minutes of fame on a New York stage .
Ballinger told Entertainment Weekly that the writers of Season 2 continued to craft the scenarios and plot points " from things that actually happened to me in my career " .
Netflix canceled the series after two seasons .
BACKGROUND MIRANDA SINGS Section::::Background .
Section::::Miranda Sings .
Since 2008 , Colleen Ballinger has posted videos as her comically talentless , narcissistic and quirky character , Miranda Sings , primarily on the YouTube channel Miranda Sings .
The character is a satire of bad , but egotistical , performers who film themselves singing as a form of self - promotion .
Miranda is portrayed as a home - schooled young woman who is eccentric and infantilized , narcissistically believes that she was born famous , and is obsessed with show business fame .
Miranda uses Spoonerisms and malapropisms , is irritable , ludicrously self - absorbed and self - righteous , socially awkward , and has a defiant , arrogant attitude .
She responds to people who offer criticism with the catchphrase , " Haters back off ! "
In March 2009 , Ballinger uploaded a Miranda video called " Free Voice Lesson " , full of awful singing advice , that quickly became her first viral sensation .
This led to requests for Ballinger to perform live as Miranda , and she later began to tour worldwide .
The Miranda Sings YouTube channel has received more than 1 billion views and has more than 9 million subscribers , while Ballinger 's personal YouTube channel has more than 1 billion views and 6 million subscribers .
Miranda has appeared in character on television shows , and Ballinger released a 2015 book , Selp - Helf , written in Miranda 's voice , that ranked No . 1 on The New York Times Best Seller list for Advice , How - To & Miscellaneous .
Her second Miranda book , My Diarrhe , appeared on the same best seller list in 2018 .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Ballinger told interviewers that she and her brother Chris began to develop the idea for the show about five or six years before it premiered .
At first they considered a film treatment but later decided on a television series format .
Ballinger chose Netflix over HBO to produce Haters Back Off because she felt that Netflix understood and was enthusiastic about the character and its online origin and fanbase .
Comparing the show to Christopher Guest 's Waiting for Guffman , showrunner Perry Rein said : " This is the first time we 've done a show about a really bad dancer and singer .
[ It has ] characters that take themselves very seriously in their very small worlds .
"
The show was one of the first scripted series created by a YouTube personality .
On YouTube , Miranda always had an offstage relationship with her mother and uncle , and Ballinger long had the idea for Miranda 's best friend , Patrick , but both characters were first seen in Season 1 of the series .
Emily , Miranda 's sister , was also introduced as a new character in Series 1 .
Ballinger said that she wanted to use the longer format of the series to expose Miranda 's vulnerability and make her believable ; to explain the source of the insecurities that make Miranda so rude and eccentric .
Emily is the only normal person in Miranda 's family , but they treat her as the odd one , like Marilyn in The Munsters .
The series expanded Miranda 's world seen in YouTube .
Miranda represents an " extreme version of what the average gawky teenage girl may be feeling . "
Season 2 introduced Miranda 's estranged father , played by Matt Besser .
/Film mused : " Haters Back Off seems like a smart move for Netflix .
[ A ] streaming content provider seems like a natural fit .
Her built - in audience is already used to watching original content online " .
TechCrunch commented : " [ T]he rise of YouTube - fueled online influencers has been breathtaking ... building big audiences beyond the reach , knowledge and control of traditional entertainment gatekeepers , including the networks . ...
Netflix can ... leverage the audiences of these online stars , and their marketing reach , to drive the fans to new properties ...
online , where their fans already routinely seek entertainment " .
In September 2016 , the series was included in The Wall Street Journal 's list of " The 6 Best New Things to Stream in October " .
Bustle.com listed " 11 Reasons You Should Watch ...
Haters Back Off " , writing that " Miranda has become emblematic of a new kind [ of ] star - seeker in the digital age : a youngster who decides that waiting for a fame - making opportunity simply wo n't do and that in order to become visible ( and ostensibly beloved ) , you have to create the opportunities for visibility yourself . "
CAST MAIN * Colleen Ballinger as Miranda Sings , a talentless , egotistical , quirky , home - schooled young " want - to - be star " .
* Angela Kinsey as Bethany , Miranda 's hypochondriac mother
* Steve Little as Jim , Miranda 's enabling uncle and manager .
* Erik Stocklin as Patrick Mooney , Miranda 's best friend and neighbor * Francesca Reale as Emily , Miranda 's exasperated , voice - of - reason - and - normality sister * Matt Besser as Kelly , Miranda and Emily 's estranged father and Jim 's brother ( Season 2 ) RECURRING
* Chaz Lamar Shepherd as Keith , a local pastor ( Season 1 ) * Dylan Playfair as Owen Trent , the church choir 's dreamy but narcissistic guitarist ( Season 1 ) * Harvey Guillen as Harvey , the manager and son of the owner of the fish shop ( Season 1 ) * Lindsay Navarro as Kleigh , Emily 's friend ( Season 1 ) * Rachelle Gillis as April , Owen 's girlfriend ( Season 1 )
* Mel Tuck as Old Man ( Seasons 1 and 2 )
* Simon Longmore as Dr. Schofele , Bethany 's doctor ( Seasons 1 and 2 )
* Kara Hayward as Amanda ( Season 2 ) GUEST STARS
* Ben Stiller as himself ( Season 1 )
*
John Early as Maureen , the Mattress Queen ( Season 1 )
* C. Ernst Harth as Taco Ta - Go Manager ( Season 2 )
* Joey Graceffa as himself ( Season 2 )
* Michael Bean as Gallery owner ( Season 2 )
* Frankie Grande as himself ( Season 2 )
* Lochlyn Munro as Brian Maxwell , a talent agent ( Season 2 )
* Colleen Ballinger as herself ( Season 2 ) PRODUCTION AND PROMOTION Section::::Production and promotion .
Season 1 of Haters
Back Off began filming in April 2016 in and around Port Coquitlam , British Columbia , near Vancouver , which substitutes , in the series , for Miranda 's hometown , Tacoma , Washington .
Filming on Season 1 wrapped on June 3 , 2016 .
Ballinger began promotions for season 1 in January 2016 with a comic YouTube video announcement .
Miranda was featured on the cover of Variety , and in a feature article about the show , in June 2016 .
Ballinger also promoted the show on her social media , including with an original song about it performed by Miranda .
On September 1 , 2016 , Netflix released the first production stills from Season 1 .
On September 21 , the show released its first of a series of teasers .
Ballinger appeared on The Tonight Show on October 14 , 2016 , the release date , to promote the series .
Season 2 filmed in and around Vancouver from April until June 5 , 2017 .
Ballinger began promotions for Season 2 in August 2017 with an appearance on Live with Kelly and Ryan .
Ballinger announced the release date of Season 2 in character as Miranda on the Miranda Sings YouTube channel on September 11 , 2017 .
On the same date , she released a new original song on Miranda 's YouTube channel to promote the season .
On October 10 , 2017 , Netflix released the official trailer for Season 2 .
On October 16 , Angela Kinsey appeared on the Today show to promote the series , and three days later she was featured in a People video .
The eight episodes of Season 2 were released by Netflix on October 20 , 2017 .
On October 23 , 2017 , Ballinger returned to Live with Kelly and Ryan for a Halloween - themed show and appeared on The Tonight Show to discuss Haters Back Off .
Two days later , Variety published a feature on Season 2 .
On October 30 , she appeared as Miranda on Total Request Live , and the next day , she appeared again on Live with Kelly and Ryan .
On January 2 , 2018 , Ballinger returned to Live with Kelly and Ryan to promote the show .
On December 1 , 2017 , Netflix canceled the series after two seasons .
EPISODES SERIES
OVERVIEW
Section::::Episodes .
Section::::Series overview .
SEASON 1 ( 2016 )
SEASON 2 ( 2017 )
Section::::Season 2 ( 2017 ) .
The second season has 8 episodes , bringing the total number of episodes to 16 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The first season of Haters Back Off received mixed reviews from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the season has a rating of 47 % , based on 17 reviews , with an average rating of 4.67/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads ,
" Haters Back Off is bizarre , painful , and often times excruciatingly funny – yet the appeal of the YouTube transport does n't quite carry over in the longer television format .
" On Metacritic , the season has a score of 54 out of 100 , based on 9 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
The show debuted as the 2nd most popular digital original series in the US for the week of October 14–20 , 2016 .
It won the " Best Comedy " award at the 2016 CelebMix Awards .
Positive reviews of Season 1 include Robert Lloyd 's in the Los Angeles Times , who observed that , unlike in Miranda 's YouTube videos , the character 's actions in the TV series have consequences and affect the other characters and their feelings .
Lloyd thought that the series succeeds in " shaping a funny idea into a semblance of life " .
He praised the performances , especially Kinsey 's .
The Guardian printed two positive reviews : Brian Moylan called the series a " hilarious transfer to Netflix . ...
Ballinger gets at something that is not only a cultural critique but often hits on the fragility of egos and everyone 's need for acceptance .
" In their other review , Stuart Heritage wrote : " It 's a uniformly singular sitcom about the effects of fame , and frequently a very funny one . ...
[ I]t is great , once you 've attuned yourself to its quirks " .
Melanie McFarland , on NPR , compared Miranda 's world with Pee - wee Herman 's , saying that both are " perversely funny , cartoonish worlds that also manage to be weirdly innocent . '
There 's just that sly element of wrongness about it that makes it
oh
so right . ' "
Daniel D'Addario wrote in Time magazine that the series " is imperfect , but it 's also more than it needed to be . ...
Ballinger examine[s ] what the obsession with having fans papers over and the new problems it creates .
" Paste magazine ranked Haters Back Off as the 9th " best new Netflix Original Series of 2016 " .
Jon O'Brien later wrote for Metro : Even if you 're not particularly a fan of Miranda Sings ... there 's still plenty to enjoy about Haters
Back Off .
Little is wonderfully absurd as the uncle almost as deluded as Miranda herself , while Reale elicits genuine sympathy as the only " normal " character regularly bulldozed by her sister 's ambition .
And by combining the strange small - town suburbia of Napoleon Dynamite and cartoonish antics of Pee - wee Herman , the show remains one of Netflix 's most wonderfully weird originals .
TheWrap 's Michael E. Ross called the series an " antic , sometimes wise , often laugh - out - loud funny case of art imitating life imitating art " , noting that " there are times ... when the veneer of ego is stripped away , and we discover the shy , insecure young woman behind the bluster .
Haters reflects a hearty sense of humor about the genesis of online celebrity . ...
[ W]hat resonates ... is Miranda 's underlying humanity , her basic drive to be recognized , to stand apart from the crowd .
And we can all relate to the pain of rejection " .
Jasef Wisener of TVOvermind.com gave the series 3.8 stars out of 5 .
He was favorably impressed by the character development and the performances , especially Ballinger 's and Reale 's .
He also liked its structure and musical score , but felt that the exposition was sometimes bogged down in the early episodes by its explanation of details and sometimes panders to Miranda 's established internet audience ; he felt that the series improves in the later episodes .
He disliked the sexual innuendos and found Miranda 's relationship with Uncle Jim uncomfortable , although these are elements carried over from Miranda 's YouTube videos .
The A.V. Club 's Danette Chavez commented that Ballinger 's " portrayal of Miranda is multidimensional in spite of the character 's single - mindedness . ...
Haters fleshes out the environment that would spawn such an egotistical personality . ...
[ L]aughs are as consistently delivered " with zany comedy , although the " domestic strife and even anguish " makes the series nearly a dramedy .
But she felt that " sometimes the foreshadowing is just a little too foreboding . ...
the tonal shifts do n't always jibe . "
In a mixed review for New York magazine 's Vulture site , Jen Chaney judged that " not everything in Haters Back Off ! works . ...
If you find Miranda Sings irritating after watching a two - minute YouTube clip , you should find something else to put in your queue .
But ... fans ... who have a reasonable amount of patience will likely find some redeeming qualities to latch onto , especially as the episodes progress . ...
Miranda is a purposely maddening character .
But Ballinger commits to her so fully and with such specific physicality ... that she 's often mesmerizing to watch . ...
[ But ] maybe Miranda Sings is better in shorter doses . "
Similarly , for The New York Times , James Poniewozik wrote that : Like Miranda 's performances , Haters can be terrible and transfixing at the same time . ...
Ballinger commits to Miranda 's hunger and histrionics .
...
There 's a deeper pathos to Miranda 's situation , but the season does n't delve deeply into that until late , by which time haters will have long since backed off .
...
There 's a lot in Haters Back Off !
to gratify Ms. Ballinger 's YouTube fan base . ...
Beyond the winces , there 's something human in its comedy of internet thirst :
the insatiable drive to put a piece of oneself out into the world and hit refresh , refresh , refresh .
Brian Lowry , writing for CNN , had a mostly negative reaction .
While he felt that while the series ' " critique of a fame - obsessed culture certainly has merit " , and that the later episodes " reward patience " , the show was too " cartoon - like " , and " there 's a sense that the series is stretched beyond what it has to offer . "
Keith Uhlich , in The Hollywood Reporter , found the gags funny , but he concluded that although Miranda is " an acidic critique of the very celebrity strivers who make up the majority of the YouTube community " , it is more effective " in short bursts " .
In " an eight - episode Netflix series ... the lampoon loses its edge " .
He also thought that much of the pathos in the series is " unearned , unconvincing " and the characters are " shallow vessels freighted down by contrived plot complications . ...
And there 's more than a bit of that vainglorious YouTubers ' entitlement in where Haters ultimately ends up , the satire finally curdling into smugness .
"
Sonia Saraiya of Variety did not think that the series has " the same organic appeal as Ballinger 's bizarre , pastiche - y videos . ...
Miranda lacks some of the innocent naivete that makes her character work on YouTube . ...
Miranda 's behavior ... could be raucously hilarious [ for some viewers ] , an example of theater - geek self - obsession run amok .
For me , anyway , Miranda 's obsessions and absorptions ... prove to be more tragic than hilarious . "
Rob Lowman of the Los Angeles Daily News wrote : " The series seems to want to exist somewhere between a Pee - wee Herman world , where Miranda exists within her own reality , and Waiting for Guffman or other parodies of self - important clueless people .
It does n't succeed as either , nor on its own terms .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Haters Back Off on
Netflix * Series Twitter account
* Season 1 Trailer ( 2016 )
* Season 2 Trailer ( 2017 )