RIVERDALE ( 2017 TV SERIES )
Riverdale is an American teen drama television series based on the characters of Archie Comics .
The series was adapted for The CW by Archie Comics ' chief creative officer Roberto Aguirre - Sacasa , and is produced by Warner Bros. Television and CBS Television Studios , in association with Berlanti Productions and Archie Comics .
Originally conceived as a feature film adaptation for Warner Bros. Pictures , the idea was re - imagined as a television series for Fox .
In 2015 , development on the project moved to The CW , where the series was ordered for a pilot .
Filming takes place in Vancouver , British Columbia .
The series features an ensemble cast based on the characters of Archie Comics , with KJ Apa in the role of Archie Andrews ; Lili Reinhart as Betty Cooper , Camila Mendes as Veronica Lodge , and Cole Sprouse as Jughead Jones , the series ' narrator .
The cast also features Madelaine Petsch as Cheryl Blossom , Ashleigh Murray as Josie McCoy , Casey Cott as Kevin Keller , Charles Melton and Ross Butler as Reginald " Reggie " Mantle and Vanessa Morgan as Toni Topaz .
Other characters in the series include the parents of the main characters : Luke Perry as Fred Andrews , Mädchen Amick as Alice Cooper , Marisol Nichols and Mark Consuelos as Hermione and Hiram Lodge , and Skeet Ulrich as FP Jones .
The series debuted on January 26 , 2017 to positive reviews .
A 22-episode second season premiered on October 11 , 2017 , and concluded on May 16 , 2018 .
On April 2 , 2018 , The CW renewed the series for a third season , which premiered on October 10 , 2018 .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
The series follows Archie Andrews ' life in the small town of Riverdale and explores the darkness hidden behind its seemingly perfect image .
CAST AND CHARACTERS * KJ Apa as Archie Andrews : A high school football player who has a passion for music .
He is best friends with Jughead Jones and Betty Cooper .
* Lili Reinhart as Betty Cooper : A smart girl with a longtime crush on Archie , she becomes friends with Veronica Lodge to help upend her perfect life .
* Camila Mendes as Veronica Lodge : A former wealthy socialite from New York City who moves to Riverdale and becomes friends with Archie , Betty , and Jughead .
* Cole Sprouse as Jughead Jones :
A philosophically inclined social outcast who is Archie 's best friend .
* Marisol Nichols as Hermione Lodge :
Veronica 's mother , who has returned to Riverdale with her daughter following the incarceration of her husband Hiram Lodge .
* Madelaine Petsch as Cheryl Blossom : A wealthy , entitled , and manipulative girl who is a classmate of Archie and his friends .
Cheryl becomes romantically involved with Toni in season two .
* Ashleigh Murray as Josie McCoy : The lead singer of Josie and the Pussycats and a classmate of Archie and his friends .
* Mädchen Amick as Alice Cooper : Betty and Polly 's mother , who is the editor of the local paper .
* Luke Perry as Fred Andrews : Archie 's father , who owns a construction company .
* Mark Consuelos as Hiram Lodge : Veronica 's father , who was recently incarcerated for illegal activities .
Consuelos joined the cast for the second season after his character was only mentioned by name in season one .
* Casey Cott as Kevin Keller : An openly gay high school student who is friends with Archie , Betty and Veronica and is the son of Riverdale 's sheriff .
Cott was promoted to series regular in the second season .
* Skeet Ulrich as F.P. Jones : Jughead 's estranged father and the leader of the Southside Serpents , a gang of criminals that live and operate on the fringes of Riverdale .
Ulrich was promoted to series regular in the second season .
* Charles Melton as Reggie Mantle : Archie 's long - time friend and rival , a football player at Riverdale High and town prankster .
Melton was cast to take over the role of Reggie in the second season after the departure of Ross Butler , who played Reggie in the first season ; Melton was then promoted to series regular in the third season .
* Vanessa Morgan as Toni Topaz : A bisexual member of the Southside Serpents , who befriends Jughead in the second season .
She is in a relationship with Cheryl .
Morgan was promoted to series regular in the third season .
EPISODES
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Warner Bros. began development on an Archie feature film in 2013 , after a pitch from writer Roberto Aguirre - Sacasa and director Jason Moore that would place Archie 's gang into a teen comedy feature film in the John Hughes tradition .
The duo brought the project to Warner Bros. , where a VP recommended a more high - concept direction involving time travel or interdimensional portals , suggesting Louis C. K. to portray an older Archie .
Dan Lin and Roy Lee became producers on the project , which eventually stalled as priorities shifted at the studio towards larger tentpole films and was reimagined as a television series .
Riverdale was originally in development at Fox , with the network landing the project in 2014 with a script deal plus penalty .
However , Fox did not go forward with the project .
In 2015 , the show 's development was moved to The CW , which officially ordered a pilot on January 29 , 2016 .
On March 7 , 2017 , The CW announced that the series had been renewed for a second season .
On April 2 , 2018 , The CW renewed the series for a third season , which premiered October 10 , 2018 .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Casting Archie was a difficult process , with Aguirre - Sacasa stating "
I think we literally saw every redheaded young guy in L.A.
It certainly felt that way .
" The production team found KJ Apa just three days before they had to present screen tests to the network , which created tension in the last few days leading up to the studio presentation .
In April 2017 , it was announced Mark Consuelos had signed on for the second season to play Veronica Lodge 's father , Hiram Lodge .
The role was in second position to his existing role on Pitch but the cancellation of that series was announced on May 1 , 2017 .
The next month , it was announced Charles Melton was cast to take over the role of Reggie from Ross Butler in season 2 due to his status as a series regular on 13 Reasons
Why .
It was also announced that Casey Cott , who played Kevin Keller , was promoted to a series regular .
In July 2017 , it was announced that True Blood star Brit Morgan had been cast in the recurring role of Penny Peabody , an attorney the Southside Serpents call in case of any run - ins with the law .
In August 2017 , it was announced Graham Phillips had been cast to play Nick St. Clair , Veronica 's ex - boyfriend from New York .
In March 2018 , Andy Cohen appeared in the sixteenth episode of the second season as himself .
In the series , he and Hermione are friends .
He previously offered her a role as a cast member on The Real Housewives of New York City ; however , Hermione turned down the offer to keep things private for the Lodge family .
In May 2018 , it was announced that Charles Melton and Vanessa Morgan , who play Reggie Mantle and Toni Topaz , respectively , would both be promoted to series regulars in the third season .
At New York Comic Con 2018 , it was announced that both Gladys Jones and Jellybean " J.B. " Jones , played by Gina Gershon and Trinity Likins respectively , would appear in the third season On November 7 , 2018 it was announced that Kelly Ripa , the wife of Mark Consuelos who portrays Hiram Lodge , will appear in an upcoming role as Hiram 's mistress .
It was also announced that Michael Consuelos , Kelly and Mark 's son , will make a guest appearance in a flashback episode as a younger Hiram .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Filming of the pilot began on March 14 , 2016 , and ended on April 1 in Vancouver , British Columbia .
Production on the remaining 12 episodes of season one began on September 7 , 2016 , in Vancouver .
Sets include Pop Tate 's Chock'lit Shoppe , a copy of the functioning diner used in the pilot that is so realistic a truck driver parked his 18-wheeler there , believing that it was open .
Season two was also filmed in Vancouver and the nearby Fraser Valley .
The aerial view of Riverdale is actually drawn from stock footage used in the series Pretty Little Liars , Gilmore Girls , and the landmark setting are the same utilized in both of the aforementioned series as well as in Hart of Dixie .
Filming for the second season started on June 22 , 2017 , and concluded on March 27 , 2018 .
Filming for the third season started on July 6 , 2018 .
HOMAGES TO OTHER FILMS AND TV SERIES Section::::Homages to other films and TV series .
Several reviewers had noted that the series ' episode titles are often taken directly or slightly altered from the titles of older films .
For example , De Elizabeth of TeenVogue points out that Riverdale 's pilot episode was named " River 's Edge " after the 1986 film of the same name , and the season finale also takes its name from 1997 's The Sweet Hereafter .
Executive producer Roberto Aguirre - Sacasa notes that this is a deliberate choice , in order to hint at what will happen in that episode .
References to the fictional setting of the Black Mirror episode " San Junipero " can be seen in viewed in season one as well as heard amongst dialogue in season two .
Additionally , Katie - Kouise Smith , of Popbuzz , notes that the opening credits for Riverdale mirror those of the Twin Peaks television series , and are intended as an homage to that series ' co - creator , David Lynch . MUSIC Section::::Music .
Musical performances are featured throughout the series , a blend of cover versions and originals .
Songs performed in episodes are released as digital singles after broadcast ; WaterTower Music released a digital compilation of the season 1 songs on May 12 , 2017 .
An album of Blake Neely 's scoring for season 1 was released on compact disc by La - La Land Records and simultaneously on download by WaterTower Music on July 18 , 2017 .
WaterTower Music released the songs performed in the musical episode in a on April 19 , 2018 , with a vinyl edition released at Urban Outfitters stores on July 13 .
SEASON 1
SEASON 2 RELEASE DVD and Blu - rayRegion 1Region
2Region 4 BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
Netflix acquired the exclusive international broadcast rights to Riverdale , making the series available as an original series to its platform less than a day after its original U.S. broadcast .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
In July 2016 , members of the cast and the executive producers attended San Diego Comic - Con to promote the upcoming series , where they premiered the first episode " Chapter One : The River 's Edge " .
The first trailer for the series was released in early December 2016 .
The CW also sponsored multiple Tastemade videos , where they cooked several foods that are popular in the Archie universe .
COMIC - BOOK
ADAPTATION Section::::Comic - book adaptation .
Along with heavily promoting the TV series in their regular comics since January 2017 , Archie Comics are planning to release a comic book adaptation of Riverdale , featuring auxiliary story arcs set within the television series ' own continuity .
The comic book adaptation is being headed by Roberto Aguirre - Sacasa himself , along with various other writers from the show .
Alongside a one - shot pilot issue , illustrated by Alitha Martinez , released in March 2017 , the first issue of the ongoing Riverdale comic book series was set to release starting April 2017 .
In addition to the adaptation , Archie Comics are releasing a series of compilation graphic novels branded under the title Road to Riverdale .
This series features early issues from the New Riverdale reboot line , introducing the audience of the TV series to the regular ongoing comic series that inspired it .
Archie Comics plans to re - print the volumes of Road to Riverdale in subsequent months as digest magazines .
The first volume was released in March 2017 .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE
Rotten TomatoesMetacriticRotten Tomatoes , it has a fresh rating of 88 % based on 61 reviews , with a weighted average of 7.27/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Riverdale offers an amusingly self - aware reimagining of its classic source material that proves eerie , odd , daring , and above all addictive .
"
On Metacritic , the season has a score of 68 out of 100 based on 36 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Dave Nemetz of TVLine gave the series a " B+ " saying that it turned , " out to be an artfully crafted , instantly engaging teen soap with loads of potential . "
Some writers have criticized the series for its handling of minority characters .
While reviewing the first season , Kadeen Griffiths of Bustle declared " the show marginalizes and ignores the [ people of color ] in the cast to the point where they may as well not be there . "
In an article for Vulture , Angelica Jade Bastien discussed the show 's treatment of Josie and the Pussycats ( who are each played by African Americans ) , noting , " They 're not characters so much as they are a vehicle for a Message .
Josie and her fellow pussycats are positioned to communicate the message that Riverdale is more modern and inclusive than teen dramas of the past , even though it has yet to prove it beyond its casting . "
Monique Jones of Ebony noted , " Despite the show 's multi - racial casting choices , it seems like Riverdale is still a mostly white town . "
She also expressed fondness for the relationship between Archie Andrews and Valerie Brown , but declared " Archie should n't be what makes Valerie interesting to us " .
Adding to its criticism of poorly - represented minority characters , the show has also faced backlash from the LGBT community for its deliberate decision not to portray Jughead Jones as asexual , despite the character being identified this way in some of the comics , and despite being urged by Jughead actor Cole Sprouse to represent the character 's asexuality .
Furthermore , the show received additional criticism regarding the queerbaiting of certain characters .
RATINGS AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Nominee(s ) !
Result !
scope="col " class="unsortable " Riverdale SHARED UNIVERSE CHILLING ADVENTURES OF SABRINA Section::::Shared universe .
Section::::Chilling Adventures of Sabrina .
In September 2017 , it was reported that a live - action television series based on the comic series Chilling Adventures of Sabrina was being developed for The CW by Warner Bros. Television and Berlanti Productions , with a planned release in the 2018–2019 television season .
The series , featuring the Archie Comics character Sabrina the Teenage Witch , would be a companion series to Riverdale .
Lee Toland Krieger directed the pilot , which was written by Aguirre - Sacasa .
Both are executive producers along with Berlanti , Schechter , and Goldwater .
In December 2017 , it was reported that the project had moved to Netflix under a new title .
In January 2018 , CW president Mark Pedowitz noted that , " at the moment , there is no discussion about crossing over " with Riverdale .
Aguirre - Sacasa added that no crossovers were planned initially so that each series could establish " their own identities and own set of rules " .
Filming for first season began on March 19 , 2018 , just as filming of the second season of Riverdale concluded , which allowed the same crew members to work on both series .
In the first season of Chilling Adventures of Sabrina , Moses Thiessen reprises his role as Ben Button from Riverdale .
Regarding a proper crossover , Aguirre - Sacasa said in October 2018 he would " hate for [ a crossover ] to never happen " between the two series , adding a potential idea for one could see the characters of Riverdale " hear[ing ] about a haunted house in Greendale and try to break in and it 's Sabrina 's house " .
He also felt since each series was already established , a crossover could happen in a standalone film with both casts , potentially titled Afterlife with Archie , based on the Archie Horror comic of the same name .
POTENTIAL SPIN - OFF Section::::Potential spin - off .
In August 2018 , Aguirre - Sacasa revealed that another spin - off was in the works at The CW .
He said that the potential spin - off would be " very different from Riverdale " and that it would be produced " in this development cycle . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS