UNITED WOMEN 'S LACROSSE LEAGUE
The United Women 's Lacrosse League ( UWLX ) is a women 's lacrosse league in the United States .
It was co - founded in Boston , Massachusetts by Digit Murphy and Aronda Kirby of the Play
It Forward Sports Foundation , under the ownership of United Women 's Sports LLC in a strategic partnership with STX .
Penn State alum and former United States national team player Michele DeJuliis was appointed as the league 's commissioner .
DeJuliis left after the 2016 season to found a new women 's pro lacrosse league , the current General Manager is Kristan Ash .
The league is composed of four teams : the Baltimore Ride , Boston Storm , Long Island Sound and Philadelphia Force .
Long Island won the first two championships .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
League play was scheduled to start on May 28 , 2016 and a draft took place on April 13 to fill the four team rosters .
In the inaugural draft , Maryland Terrapins alumnus and former US national team player Katie Schwarzmann would be the first ever player selected , taken by the Baltimore Ride with the top pick .
Other players selected in the first round of the inaugural draft were also current or former members of the US national team .
Said players included Liz Hogan ( Boston ) , Michelle Tumolo ( Philly ) and Devon Wills ( Long Island ) .
The inaugural regular season champions were the Long Island Sound , while Dana Dobbie captured the scoring title .
The four teams in the UWLX do not have their own home venues .
Instead , all teams travel to large youth lacrosse tournaments to participate in regular season play .
During the inaugural season , it was announced that the construction of a new sports complex in Attleboro , Massachusetts , known as the New England Sports Village , would serve as the eventual headquarters for UWLX .
The league also believes in having a positive impact in the female sporting community .
Of note , players in UWLX conduct lacrosse clinics for young players .
In addition , the league has partnered with Jazmine Smith , the founder and CEO of Eyekonz , which provides sporting opportunities for African American girls in Philadelphia through participation in field hockey and lacrosse .
Smith brought the Strawberry Mansion High School girls ' lacrosse team to the inaugural UWLX weekend at Lehigh University .
HISTORY Section::::History .
UWLX is the first opportunity in the form of a nationally competitive league afforded to women looking to continue playing lacrosse after their collegiate playing days conclude .
Among the league 's efforts , its inaugural season has allowed for over 100 opportunities for women in post - collegiate sport play in lacrosse .
" Our Play It Forward platform was started to grow opportunities for women in professional sports , " and the inaugural season features games that will be played at or in close proximity to major lacrosse tournaments in the Northeast , allowing the league to connect with and inspire younger players .
During the month of March 2016 , the league unveiled the club names and logos , while also announcing the hiring of head coaches .
The first four head coaches in league history include Jen Adams ( Baltimore ) , Amy Patton ( Boston ) Missy Doherty ( Philadelphia ) and Shannon Smith ( Long Island ) .
In late November 2016 , it was announced that UWLX engaged in a partnership with Gillette Stadium which would see the league serve as a promotional partner of the 2017 NCAA Division I Women 's Lacrosse Championship .
The event is scheduled to be held on Memorial Day Weekend 2017 .
TEAMS
Baltimore Ride
Baltimore
Jen Adams
Boston Storm Boston
Abbey Capobianco Long Island Sound New York Shannon Smith Philadelphia Force
Philadelphia
Mike Bedford GENERAL MANAGERS Section::::General Managers . !
General Manager !
Term SEE ALSO * Major League Lacrosse , the professional men 's field lacrosse league in North America
* National Lacrosse League , the professional men 's box lacrosse league in North America
* Women 's Professional Lacrosse League , a professional women 's field lacrosse league in North America
* List of professional sports teams in the United States and Canada REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS