MOLLY 'S GAME
Molly 's Game is a 2017 American biographical crime drama film written and directed by Aaron Sorkin ( in his directorial debut ) , based on the memoir of the same name by Molly Bloom .
It stars Jessica Chastain , Idris Elba , Kevin Costner , Michael Cera ,
Brian d'Arcy James , Chris O'Dowd , Bill Camp , Graham Greene , Claire Rankin , Joe Keery , and Jeremy Strong .
The film follows Bloom ( Chastain ) , who becomes the target of an FBI investigation of the underground poker empire she runs for Hollywood celebrities , athletes , business tycoons , and the Russian mob .
Principal photography began in November 2016 in Toronto , Ontario , Canada .
The film premiered on September 8 , 2017 , at the Toronto International Film Festival , and began a limited theatrical release in the United States on December 25 , 2017 , by STXfilms , before expanding wide on January 5 , 2018 and grossed $ 59 million worldwide .
Molly 's Game received positive reviews , with particular praise for Sorkin 's screenplay , as well as Chastain and Elba 's performances , with the former being considered one of the best of her career by some critics .
The film earned Chastain a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actress – Drama , while Sorkin earned nominations for his screenplay at the Academy Awards , Golden Globes , Writers Guild of America Awards , and BAFTA Awards .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Molly Bloom is a world - class mogul skier with Olympic aspirations , the result of years of enforced training from her overbearing father .
In a qualifying event for the 2002 Winter Olympics , she is severely injured , ending her career .
Instead of following her original plan of attending law school , Molly decides to take a year off and move to Los Angeles .
Once she arrives , she becomes a bottle service waitress at a club , where she meets Dean , an ostentatious but unsuccessful real estate developer .
She becomes his office manager , and he soon involves her in running his underground poker games .
Many famous and wealthy individuals , such as movie stars , investment bankers , and sports players , are involved in Dean 's game .
Molly earns large sums of money on tips alone .
Molly is initially uninformed on poker topics but quickly learns how to appeal to the players to gain tips .
In particular , she hopes to please the most successful player , Player X , by attracting new players to the game .
Dean , upon seeing that Molly is becoming increasingly independent in running the games , attempts to control her , and then he fires her .
Molly , having gained contacts through years of running the game , decides to create her own poker games .
She rents a penthouse at a hotel and hires a staff to help her run games .
Additionally , she contacts employees at clubs and casinos to try and spread word about her poker games .
Player X , along with many other players , decides to leave Dean 's games to play at Molly 's game .
Molly becomes increasingly successful , gaining more money while being pressured by Player X to raise the stakes for her games .
Harlan Eustice , a skilled , conservative , and successful player , joins Molly 's game .
One night , after accidentally losing a hand to the notorious worst player in Molly 's circle , Harlan becomes increasingly compulsive , suffering heavy losses ( later , Molly finds out that Player X , who enjoys ruining people 's lives more than the game itself , has been funding Harlan to keep him in the game ) .
After Molly berates him for his unethical actions , Player X decides to change venue for his games , and the other players join him , leaving Molly .
Molly moves to New York , with the hope of beginning a new underground poker game .
After reaching out to many wealthy New Yorkers , Molly finds enough players for several weekly games .
Despite continuous success , she fears being unable to cover her losses when players can not pay .
Her dealer convinces her to begin taking a percentage of large pots , allowing her to recoup her potential losses but making her game an illegal gambling operation .
One of her Los Angeles players is indicted for running a Ponzi scheme ; Molly is investigated and questioned as to who attended her games .
At this time , Molly becomes increasingly addicted to drugs , as the games have increasingly taken their toll .
Her players also begin to include wealthy individuals from the Russian mafia , among others .
She is approached by several Italian mafia members who offer their services to extort money from non - paying players .
After she declines , she is attacked in her home , where she is held at gunpoint and her mother 's life is threatened .
As she is about to return to her poker games , the FBI conducts a raid , a result of Douglas Downey , one of her players , acting as an informant .
Molly 's assets are seized , and she returns home to live with her mother .
Two years later , Molly has moved out and published a book where she names a few individuals that played in her games .
She is arrested by the FBI and indicted for involvement in illegal gambling with the mafia .
She enlists the help of Charlie Jaffey , a high - profile and expensive lawyer in New York , who agrees to help after he learns that she has been protecting innocent people who were affected by her poker games .
While she is in New York awaiting trial , her father , Larry , seeks her out and attempts to reconcile with her .
He admits that he was overbearing and that he treated Molly differently than her brothers because she had known about his affairs .
Charlie reads Molly 's book and becomes interested in helping her case , as he feels she has not committed serious enough wrongdoing to merit a prison term .
Charlie negotiates a deal for Molly to receive no sentence and for her money to be returned in exchange for her hard drives and digital records from gambling .
Molly declines this deal , fearing that the information about her players would be released , and she pleads guilty .
The judge , deciding that she had committed no serious crimes , sentences her to community service , probation , and a $ 200,000 fine .
CAST * Jessica Chastain as Molly Bloom * Samantha Isler as teenage Molly * Piper Howell as 7-year - old Molly
* Idris Elba as Charlie Jaffey , Molly 's lawyer .
* Kevin Costner as Larry Bloom , Molly 's father and a clinical psychologist .
* Michael Cera as Player X , a composite of several Hollywood celebrity gamblers from Molly 's ring .
*
Brian d'Arcy James as Brad , a hedge fund manager .
* Chris O'Dowd as Douglas Downey , the man who introduces Molly to the Russian mob and brings them to the table .
* J. C. MacKenzie as Harrison Wellstone
* Bill Camp as Harlan Eustice , a card sharp who gets in over his head .
* Graham Greene as Judge Foxman
* Jeremy Strong as Dean Keith , the real estate developer who brings Molly into the world of underground poker .
* Matthew D. Matteo as Bobby
* Joe Keery as Cole * Natalie Krill as Winston * Claire Rankin as Charlene Bloom , Molly 's mother and Larry 's wife .
* Madison McKinley as Shelby * Angela Gots as B * Khalid Klein as Neal * Victor Serfaty as Diego * Jon Bass as Shelly Habib
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
On November 12 , 2014 , Mark Gordon 's The Mark Gordon Company bought the feature film adaptation rights to Molly Bloom 's memoir , Molly 's Game : The True Story of the 26-Year - Old Woman Behind the Most Exclusive , High - Stakes Underground Poker Game in the World , which Gordon produced .
Aaron Sorkin was hired to adapt the memoir into a screenplay .
Bloom had already approached Sorkin , as he was her " favorite writer " .
On January 7 , 2016 , it was announced that Sorkin would make his directorial debut on the film , for Sony Pictures Entertainment , while Amy Pascal also produced .
On February 18 , 2016 , Sony exited the project , and on May 13 , 2016 , STX Entertainment came on board , and subsequently bought the film 's US and Chinese distribution rights for $ 9 million .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
On February 18 , 2016 , Sorkin offered Jessica Chastain the lead role in the film , but the negotiations between them had then not yet begun .
On May 6 , 2016 , Idris Elba joined the film to star alongside Chastain .
Sorkin stated that " the casting of Jessica and Idris in the two lead roles is any filmmaker 's dream come true , they 're two of the greatest actors of their generation , paired for the first time , and their chemistry will be electric . "
On September 7 , 2016 , Michael Cera joined the cast as Player X , a celebrity poker player .
On October 17 , 2016 , Kevin Costner joined as Molly Bloom 's father , and on October 21 , 2016 , Brian d'Arcy James was added .
On November 9 , 2016 , Chris O'Dowd , Jeremy Strong , Bill Camp , and Graham Greene joined the cast as well .
Molly Bloom herself discussed Chastain 's portrayal of her character with ET Canada stating , " We spent a little time together .
She did n't have much time for prep or research , " Bloom tells ET Canada 's Matte Babel .
" I was blown away by her performance by how right it was and how deep and understood I felt by her performance . "
FILMING Section::::Filming .
Principal photography began on November 9 , 2016 , in Toronto .
Production concluded on February 9 , 2017 .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Molly 's Game premiered on September 8 , 2017 , at the Toronto International Film Festival .
It was also the closing film at AFI Fest on November 16 , 2017 , replacing All the Money in the World .
It began a limited release in North America on December 25 , 2017 , before expanding wide on January 5 , 2018 .
The film was previously slated to be released on November 22 , 2017 , before being moved to the Christmas date in October 2017 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Molly 's Game grossed $ 28.8 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 30.5 million in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 59.3 million .
On Christmas Day , the film debuted with $ 1.04 million from 271 theaters .
In its first full weekend , the film grossed $ 2.3 million , finishing 13th at the box office .
The film expanded wide on January 5 , 2018 , alongside the opening of , and was projected to gross around $ 6 million from 1,608 theaters in its opening weekend .
It ended up debuting to $ 6.9 million , finishing 7th at the box office .
The following weekend it dropped 44 % to $ 3.9 million , finishing 11th .
In its third week of wide release the film grossed $ 1.7 million , finishing 19th .
The film also grossed a total of $ 4.5 million in France and $ 5.3 million in the United Kingdom .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 83 % based on 270 reviews , with an average rating of 7.2/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Powered by an intriguing story and a pair of outstanding performances from Jessica Chastain and Idris Elba
, Molly 's Game marks a solid debut for writer - director Aaron Sorkin .
"
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 71 out of 100 , based on 46 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A – " on an A+ to F scale .
Peter Debruge of Variety praised Sorkin 's script , saying , " ...
Molly 's Game delivers one of the screen 's great female parts — a dense , dynamic , compulsively entertaining affair , whose central role makes stunning use of Chastain 's stratospheric talent . "
Mike Ryan of Uproxx gave the film 9/10 , writing , " Molly 's Game is a perfect story for Sorkin .
There 's poker , the Russian mafia , the Italian mafia , celebrities , and sports .
The only thing missing for Sorkin 's wheelhouse is President Bartlet .
And at over two hours long , the film still feels tight and never fails to entertain . "
Writing for Rolling Stone , Peter Travers gave the film 3 out of 4 stars , saying , " Molly 's Game bristles with fun zingers , electric energy and Sorkin 's brand of verbal fireworks – all of which help enormously when the movie falters in fleshing out its characters .
Still , in his first film with a female protagonist , the writer - director has hit on a timely theme : the tribulations of being a woman in a man 's world . "
Chastain 's portrayal of Molly Bloom was praised by The Hollywood Reporter , for " Chastain roars through the performance with a force and take - no - prisoners attitude that keeps one rapt . "
The Hollywood Reporter also stated : " Sorkin keeps things rolling relentlessly and gets fine results from the actors down the line [ ... ] .
[ ... ] The film looks sharp and a trio of editors keeps thing pacey despite the 140-minute running time .
" It concluded : " One strong woman and many rich men make for a good show . " ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . ! scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Date of ceremony ! scope="col " Category ! scope="col " Recipient(s ) and nominee(s ) ! scope="col " Result ! scope="col " class="unsortable " ! scope="row " AARP 's Movies for Grownups Awards ! scope="row " Academy Awards ! scope="row " Alliance of Women Film Journalists ! scope="row " American Cinema Editors ! scope="row " British Academy Film Awards ! scope="row " rowspan="2 " Critics ' Choice Movie Awards ! scope="row " Denver International Film Festival ! scope="row " Detroit Film Critics Society !
scope="row " Florida Film Critics Circle ! scope="row " rowspan="2 " Georgia Film Critics Association ! scope="row " rowspan="2 " Golden Globe Awards !
scope="row " Mill Valley Film Festival !
scope="row
" Palm Springs International Film Festival !
scope="row " Producers Guild of America Awards ! scope="row " San Francisco Film Critics Circle ! scope="row " rowspan="2 " Satellite Awards ! scope="row " USC Scripter Awards !
scope="row
" Washington D.C. Area Film Critics Association !
scope="row " Writers Guild of America Awards !
scope="row
" Zurich Film Festival REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Molly 's Game at History vs. Hollywood