FIFTY SHADES ( FILM SERIES )
Fifty Shades is an American film series that consists of three erotic romantic drama films , based on the Fifty Shades trilogy by English author E. L. James .
It is distributed by Universal Studios and stars Dakota Johnson and Jamie Dornan as the lead roles Anastasia Steele and Christian Grey , respectively .
Sam Taylor - Johnson directed the first film and initially she was slated to be the director of the sequels as well , however subsequently the second and third films were directed by James Foley .
The first film , Fifty Shades of Grey , was released on February 13 , 2015 , while the second , Fifty Shades Darker , was released on February 10 , 2017 .
Fifty Shades Freed , the third film , was released on February 9 , 2018 .
Worldwide , the series has grossed over $ 1.320 billion , making it the fourth highest - grossing R - rated franchise of all - time .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Two years after the trilogy 's first novel was released , several distribution companies had bid for the rights of the trilogy .
Warner Bros. , Sony , Paramount and Universal , as well as Mark Wahlberg 's production company , put in bids for the film rights .
The winning bid went to Universal Studios and Focus Features , at $ 5 million .
With James gaining control over the process of the making of the film , she hand - picked Dana Brunetti and Michael De Luca as the producers .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production . !
Film ! !
Release date ! !
Producers ! !
Director ! !
Screenwriter DIRECTOR Section::::Director .
On June 19 , 2013 , Sam Taylor - Johnson was chosen to direct the first film .
On February 6 , 2015 , Taylor - Johnson announced the sequels , prompting she would return to direct the sequels .
It was later revealed that Taylor - Johnson would not return .
On August 20 , 2015 , it was revealed by Deadline Hollywood that James Foley was the front - runner to direct the sequel and third film Fifty Shades Freed .
SCREENWRITER Section::::Screenwriter .
Kelly Marcel was chosen as the screenwriter for the first film .
On April 22 , 2015 , it was announced that James ' husband , Niall Leonard , would write the script for the sequel .
Leonard also went on to write the script for the third film .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
The casting for the lead roles was considered controversial .
Many contenders considered for the film included Ryan Gosling , Garrett Hedlund , Theo James , Alexander Skarsgård , François Arnaud , Charlie Hunnam , Scott Eastwood , Luke Bracey , and Billy Magnussen as Christian Grey .
Alicia Vikander , Imogen Poots , Elizabeth Olsen , Shailene Woodley , and Felicity Jones were all considered for the role of Anastasia Steele .
On September 2 , 2013 , Dakota Johnson and Charlie Hunnam were cast as Anastasia Steele and Christian Grey respectively .
As a result , the displeasure of the casting from fans caused controversy .
In response , Brunetti stated , " There is a lot that goes into casting that is n't just looks .
Talent , availability , their desire to do it , chemistry with other actor , etc .
So if your favorite was n't cast , then it is most likely due to something on that list .
Keep that in mind while hating and keep perspective . "
On October 12 , it was announced Hunnam had quit the role of Grey and the studio was in the process of searching for a new actor .
On October 23 , Jamie Dornan was cast as the replacement for Christian Grey .
In October 2013 , Jennifer Ehle was cast as Carla Wilks .
On October 31 , 2013 , Victor Rasuk was cast as José Rodriguez ,
Jr. On November 22 , 2013 , Eloise Mumford was cast as Kate Kavanagh .
On December 2 , 2013 , singer Rita Ora was cast as Christian 's younger sister Mia .
On December 3 , 2013 , Marcia Gay Harden was cast as Christian 's mother , Grace .
On January 28 , 2016 , Kim Basinger joined the film to play the role of Elena Lincoln in the sequels , Grey 's business partner and former lover , while Luke Grimes , Eloise Mumford and Max Martini would be returning for the sequels .
On February 5 , Bella Heathcote was cast as Leila , one of Grey 's former submissives .
In the same month , Eric Johnson was cast to play Jack Hyde , Ana 's boss at SIP .
On February 18 , 2016 , Robinne Lee and Fay Masterson joined the film 's cast .
On February 20 , Brant Daugherty signed on to play Luke Sawyer , the personal bodyguard for Anastasia in the third film .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
For Fifty Shades of Grey , principal photography was filmed in Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada , which began on December 1 , 2013 .
Scenes were filmed in the Gastown district of Vancouver .
Bentall 5 was used as the Grey Enterprises building .
The University of British Columbia serves as Washington State University Vancouver , from which Ana graduates .
The Fairmont Hotel Vancouver was used as the Heathman Hotel .
The film was also shot at the North Shore Studios .
The production officially ended on February 21 , 2014 .
Reshoots involving scenes between Dornan and Johnson took place in Vancouver during the week of October 13 , 2014 .
For Fifty Shades Darker and Fifty Shades Freed , principal photography was to commence in June in Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada .
This was later to be impossible , due to the script being unwritten at the moment .
In November 2015 , Universal Studios announced that both films would be shot back - to - back with principal photography scheduled to commence in early 2016 .
Filming began in Paris and Vancouver from February 9 , 2016 , to July 12 , 2016 , under the working title " Further Adventures of Max and Banks 2 & 3 . "
Filming on Fifty Shades Darker concluded on April 11 , 2016 .
FILMS FIFTY SHADES OF GREY ( 2015 )
Section::::Films .
Section::::Fifty Shades of Grey ( 2015 ) .
When Anastasia " Ana " Steele , a literature student , goes to interview the wealthy Christian Grey , as a favor to her roommate Kate Kavanagh , she encounters a handsome , brilliant and intimidating man .
The innocent and naive Ana , startled to realize she wants him , despite his enigmatic reserve and advice , finds herself desperate to get close to him .
Not able to resist Ana 's beauty and independent spirit , Grey admits he wants her too , but in his own terms .
Ana hesitates as she discovers the singular tastes of Grey – despite the embellishments of success – his multinational businesses , his vast wealth , his loving family – Grey is consumed by the need to control everything .
As they get close , Steele starts to discover Grey 's secrets and explores her own BDSM desires .
FIFTY SHADES DARKER ( 2017 )
Section::::Fifty Shades Darker ( 2017 ) .
Following the events of the first film , Anastasia Steele and Christian Grey resume their relationship under Ana 's terms .
However , their relationship is tested when Christian 's past threatens the couple .
FIFTY SHADES FREED ( 2018 )
Section::::Fifty Shades Freed ( 2018 ) .
Believing they 've left behind the shadowy figures from the past , billionaire Christian Grey and his new wife , Anastasia , fully embrace their inextricable connection and shared life of luxury .
Just as the Greys begin to step into their new roles , sinister events come to light and jeopardize their happy ending before it even begins .
CAST !
Leila Williams !
Gia Matteo !
Luke Sawyer !
Boyce Fox
CREW
Fifty Shades of Grey ( 2015 ) !
Fifty Shades
Darker ( 2017 ) !
Fifty Shades
Freed ( 2018 ) !
Director !
Producer(s ) !
Writer(s ) !
Composer !
Director of photography !
Editor(s ) !
Production Companies !
Distributed by !
Runtime ( Unrated ) !
Release Date RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
With a combined worldwide gross over $ 1.3 billion , the franchise is the fourth biggest R - rated franchise ever , behind only The Matrix ( $ 1.6 billion over three films ) , The Hangover ( $ 1.4 billion over three films ) and Alien ( $ 1.328 billion not counting the PG-13 Alien vs. Predator ) .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
!
rowspan="2 " Film ! rowspan="2 " Release date !
colspan="4 " Box office
gross !
rowspan="2 "
Budget !
rowspan="2
" Reference !
Opening weekend(North America ) !
North America !
Other territories !
Worldwide $ 38,806,000 $ 100,407,760 $ 270,217,873 $ 370,625,633 $ 55 million !
colspan="2 "
Total !
$ !
$ !
$ 150 million !
rowspan="2 " CRITICAL AND PUBLIC RESPONSE Section::::Critical and public response . !
Film !
Rotten Tomatoes !
Metacritic !
CinemaScore Fifty Shades Darker Fifty Shades Freed !
Average !
16 % !
37 !
B ACCOLADES
Critics ' Choice Awards
Best Song
" Love Me like You Do " rowspan=6 Golden Raspberry Awards
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS