LEXA ( THE 100 )
Lexa is a fictional character from the American post - apocalyptic science fiction television series
The 100 , produced by The CW .
The recurring television character ( portrayed by Alycia Debnam - Carey ) does not appear in the books on which the series is based .
The commander of the allied Grounder clans , Lexa is proven to be a reasonable leader and strong warrior .
She considers love a weakness , a view significantly impacted by the death of her girlfriend , Costia .
Though she starts to show romantic feelings for Clarke Griffin ( leader of the Sky People ) and takes Clarke 's views into consideration , Lexa puts her people first , even at the expense of losing Clarke 's trust .
Lexa has been well received by critics and fans , who consider her to be one of the show 's more interesting and complex characters .
She has been a source of frequent debate , particularly for how she was written out of the series .
Her relationship with Clarke , which was viewed as compelling , significantly impacted the LGBT community and many viewers embraced it as a positive or tempestuous depiction of friendship , love and betrayal .
The relationship was , however , criticized for being unnecessarily tragic , leading to a national debate about the " bury your gays " trope .
APPEARANCES SEASON 2
Section::::Appearances .
Section::::Season 2 .
In " Fog of War , " two days after a massacre , mechanic and explosives expert Raven discovers Mount Weather has jammed communications , preventing them from reaching out to other potential survivors from the Ark ( a ship that held descendants of humans who survived the nuclear apocalypse 97 years before ) .
The survivors become known as Sky People to the Grounders ( descendants of humans on Earth who survived the nuclear apocalypse ) .
After a group of survivors find the communications tower , they are forced to split and take shelter from an acid fog .
Clarke , a teenager who has taken on a leader role for her camp , realizes she no longer recognizes Finn , her one - time lover .
Jaha and Kane , two former leaders of the Ark , are told that one of them must kill the other to have even a chance at speaking with the commander of the Grounders .
Kane attempts to take his own life rather than kill Jaha , but a Grounder witness , Lexa , reveals herself to be the commander and says she believes their wish for peace is sincere .
She allows Jaha to escape with a message to his camp : leave within two days , or die .
In " Long Into an Abyss , " with the Grounders ' deadline imminent , Abby ( Clarke 's mother ) and
Jaha disagree over what the survivors are to do ; Jaha wishes to evacuate to the so - called ' City of Light ' , while Abby wants to remain behind to rescue other members .
Clarke and two of her fellow people ( Octavia and Bellamy ) hold Lincoln in the dropship ; he is a Grounder and was experimented on with a serum to become a reaper ( a mindless , zombie - like killer ) .
When Lincoln is almost mercy - killed , his heart stops and he is revived by Clarke , who believes curing reapers depends on waiting for the serum to leave their bodies , even though the reaper might temporarily die in the process .
With this information , Clarke realizes they have something to offer the Grounders .
When Abby is successful in curing Lincoln , Lexa grants Clarke the truce , but says she must be allowed to execute Finn before it can begin .
In " Spacewalker , " Clarke returns to camp and tells them the Grounders will cease their attack if they are given Finn , who is the one who massacred a number of their people .
The tension between the people in Camp Jaha rises as opinions are divided whether to give Finn to the Grounders or not .
At the camp , Abby and Kane , having returned , think they can bargain with the Grounders by offering to put Finn on trial , but such plans are wasted as Finn gives himself up to the Grounders .
In the end , Clarke goes to meet with Lexa in a last - ditch effort to save Finn from the brutal execution process Lincoln has explained .
When Lexa refuses clemency , Clarke asks if she can say goodbye to Finn .
She approaches , kisses him , and tells him she loves him while stabbing him in the heart , killing him quickly .
In " Remember Me , " Clarke and a group from the Ark set off to a Grounder camp ( Tondc ) to complete their agreement for a truce .
On the way , Clarke is haunted by visions of Finn .
Bellamy tries to convince Clarke to let him go to Mount Weather as an inside man ; Clarke says she can not lose him too .
When they arrive at the village , Clarke burns Finn 's corpse , along with the corpses of those he killed , in a traditional Grounder funeral .
While grieving , Lexa tells Clarke of Costia , her own past love who was tortured and killed by Lexa 's enemy , who believed she knew Lexa 's secrets .
She tells Clarke that love is weakness .
At a dinner , Kane gifts Lexa with a bottle of liquor .
When Gustus , her right hand , tests it for her , he appears to be poisoned , leading Lexa to believe it was an assassination attempt by the Sky People .
Clarke immediately thinks it was Raven , as she was Finn 's former girlfriend and loved him .
Clarke confronts her ; Raven punches Clarke for accusing her of doing it .
Lexa nearly kills Raven , but Bellamy figures out it was Gustus who poisoned the cup , and Clarke proves it to Lexa by drinking from the bottle herself .
Lexa kills Gustus .
When Lincoln confronts Bellamy about how he knew it was Gustus , he says Gustus would do anything to protect Lexa .
Clarke decides she sees Lexa 's point about how love is a weakness and tells Bellamy he was right and should go to Mount Weather .
In " Survival of the Fittest , " Clarke and Lexa encounter a gigantic mutated gorilla after one of the grounder council members drives Clarke into the forest with the intent to kill her .
They escape , but become temporarily trapped in its cage .
Lexa is injured , but that does not stop her from dispensing some advice about leadership to Clarke .
Clarke figures out a way to escape , and also has an idea about freeing the Grounders inside Mount Weather to help fight the Mountain Men . "
In Rubicon , " bone marrow experiments at Mount Weather are proven to work ; people at Mount Weather , who had been prisoners to the place due to their anatomy being incompatible with Earth 's radiation , can now possibly roam the land ; Cage , son of Mount Weather 's leader Wallace , plans to destroy any chance of peace between the Grounders and people of Mount Weather by launching a missile .
Clarke races to the village where she explains the danger to Lexa .
Lexa points out to Clarke that if they warn anyone else and stop the meeting , the Mountain Men will realize they have a spy inside the mountain and Bellamy will be compromised before having completed his mission .
Clarke is reluctant to leave so many others to die , but agrees Lexa is right and the two secretly escape .
As they leave , Clarke sees her mother arriving in the village and returns to try to rescue Abby as the missile hits the village .
In " Resurrection , " Clarke and Abby survive the missile strike on Tondc , but Abby is horrified to realize Clarke knew it was coming and did nothing to save the rest of the people in the village .
She goes back to help survivors , while Lexa and Clarke set off to find and kill the spotter who called in the strike .
Clarke finds and kills the spotter with Lincoln 's help , and realizes the spotter 's lack of a hazmat suit
means the Mountain Men have started harvesting her friends .
Inside Mount Weather , Jasper ( a friend of Clarke 's ) and the others fight back and find refuge with those in Mount Weather who do not agree with Wallace or Cage .
In " Bodyguard of Lies , " Clarke and Lexa rehash the plan of attack , and Lexa tells Clarke she ( Clarke ) was born to be a leader .
Octavia figures out Clarke and Lexa knew about the missile , and Lexa decides she needs to be killed to protect that secret .
Clarke stops the attempted murder .
She confronts Lexa about her plan and her facade of heartlessness , and Lexa reveals she has feelings for Clarke .
As they wait for the deadly fog to clear , Lexa informs Clarke she does trust her and will no longer try to hurt Octavia .
She notes that the Grounder ways are just focused on survival .
Clarke suggests that maybe life should be about more than just surviving , and Lexa catches her off guard with a kiss .
Clarke returns the kiss before she tells Lexa she is not ready to be with anyone yet .
They are alerted to Raven 's signal that the fog is disabled .
The combined grounder / arker army marches to war with Clarke and Lexa at its head .
The Mountain Men prepare to deploy acid fog , but Bellamy manages to escape a security team and destroy the system in an explosion just in time .
In " Blood Must Have Blood : Part 1 , " Bellamy frees the Grounders inside Mount Weather , as Clarke 's plan is to attack from within .
When the generators are taken out , soldiers from Mount Weather open fire on the army in front of their doors , but those still manage to destroy the lock at the last second .
When they pull the door open , Lexa commands her people to stand down because of a deal she just cut with the Mountain Men .
When the Grounders retreat , almost all of the Sky People accept defeat and soon retreat , leaving behind only a betrayed Clarke at the front door and Octavia in the tunnels .
SEASON 3
Section::::Season 3 .
In " Wanheda : Part Two , " attackers on a jeep turn out to be Arkers who landed separately .
Their numbers have dwindled to 63 due to conflict with the community called Ice Nation and they accept Kane 's offer to come to Arkadia , where the other Sky People live .
Part of the group continue to search for Clarke , who has been on the run for three months due to now being a legend and subsequent target because of her defeat of the Mountain Men after Lexa 's betrayal .
This has earned her the nickname " Wanheda " ( commander of death ) .
Indra , one of Lexa 's best and most trusted warriors , warns Lexa that the Ice Nation is marching on her ; Indra is there when bounty hunter Roan ( the banished Ice Nation prince ) brings Clarke to Lexa , who sought to capture Clarke before members of Ice Nation did .
Still angry at Lexa for her betrayal , Clarke is dragged out kicking and screaming while vowing revenge on Lexa .
In " Ye Who Enter Here , " Clarke struggles with taking revenge on , as well as forgiving , Lexa .
Lexa tells Clarke that she intends to initiate the Sky People into her coalition as the thirteenth clan .
Clarke believes Lexa only wants this because her ( Clarke 's ) defeat of the Mountain Men has made Lexa look weak .
Lexa focuses on sparring with Aden , a Nightblood she has been training for the role of Commander .
Nightbloods are Grounders with black blood ; they are the only Grounders who can become commanders .
As Titus ( Lexa 's right - hand man and former mentor ) wants Lexa to kill Clarke because he feels that Clarke has weakened her reputation , Roan suggests that Clarke kill Lexa .
In the end , Clarke can not do it and Lexa apologizes for her betrayal .
Emerson , the last survivor of Mount Weather , is revealed to be alive .
In " Watch the Thrones , " in a fight to the death for the right to the throne , Queen Nia chooses her son Roan to fight Lexa .
Lexa bests Roan but kills Nia instead of him , and pronounces Roan the king of Ice Nation .
She and Clarke later bond as Clarke tends to her wounds .
In " Hakeldama , " Clarke , Lexa , and other Grounders discover an army of fallen Grounders , slain by Pike ( the new and destructive leader of the Sky People ) and his followers .
Indra is found wounded and says Bellamy persuaded Pike to let her live in order to tell Lexa that the Sky People reject the newly - formed coalition .
Lexa allows Clarke 's return to Arkadia to tell Bellamy and the others to step down .
Clarke fails to convince Bellamy , but convinces Lexa to end the cycle of violence in hopes of peace .
In " Bitter Harvest , " Lexa worries that by trying to make peace instead of engaging in war , she is betraying the commanders who came before her .
Clarke assures her that her legacy will be peace .
Roan has Emerson , the last Mountain Man , delivered to Clarke ; she must decide his fate .
She ultimately decides to let Lexa banish him .
In " Thirteen , " the Grounders celebrate their Ascension Day , a holy day for Grounders .
Octavia and a man named Semet walk in claiming the Sky People destroyed their village .
Discussing the situation , Titus wants Lexa to destroy the thirteenth clan while Clarke thinks they just need time to take out Pike from the inside .
Speaking to everyone , Lexa orders the armies not to attack , but instead make a perimeter around Arkadia and says that any Sky Person found past the five mile buffer will be killed .
Semet is angry at this and attempts to kill Lexa , but is stopped by Titus who kills him .
Later , Titus is against Clarke staying , believing she further endangers Lexa 's life .
He warns Lexa that , just like with Costia , she may not be able to separate feelings from duty .
Lexa is enraged at this , reminding him that because she let Ice Nation into her coalition even after they cut off Costia 's head and sent it to her bed , she is more than capable of separating feelings from duty .
Later , Clarke goes into Lexa 's room and realizes she is saying goodbye .
Clarke says the reason she is going back is because the Sky People are her people .
Lexa says that this devotion is what makes Clarke the person she is .
Clarke suggests that maybe someday they will owe nothing more to their people , and Lexa responds with " May we meet again . "
Clarke kisses her and they have sex .
Afterward , Clarke admires Lexa 's tattoos , pointing out there are only seven circles on her back despite there being nine participants .
Lexa tells her she got the one on her back on her Ascension Day , and asks to talk about something else .
Clarke agrees and they become intimate again .
It is later , as Lexa is running into Clarke 's room , that Lexa is accidentally shot by Titus , who intended to kill Clarke .
Clarke catches Lexa as she falls
and they take her to the bed .
Lexa realizes she is going to die and tells Clarke not to be afraid .
She tells Titus to never harm Clarke again , and he swears he will not .
She tells him serve the next commander as he served her .
Clarke continues to try and save Lexa , but she tells Clarke that her spirit will find a new commander .
She says her fight is over and that Clarke was right that life should be about more than just surviving .
Clarke recites the Traveler 's Blessing , an Arkadian prayer .
As Lexa dies , Clarke kisses her one last time .
Titus extracts a tech from Lexa 's neck , where her tattoo is .
The tech is called " the flame , " and it is revealed to be Lexa 's spirit .
She was augmented to carry an AI ( the flame ) .
The flame is how every new commander is chosen , with each new commander becoming a part of the flame .
It is only compatible with Nightbloods .
Aden is meant to succeed Lexa , but , in " Stealing Fire , " he is murdered by Ontari , a rogue Nightblood who seeks the throne for herself .
In " Perverse Instantiation — Part Two " , Clarke is on a mission to stop a holographic AI named ALIE from world domination .
ALIE is the one responsible for launching a nuclear strike on Earth because she believed it was needed to save humanity from extinction .
This is in contrast to what her creator , Becca , had wanted .
With Jaha 's help , ALIE has been successful in getting many of the Sky People to swallow a chip that takes away pain ( emotional or physical ) and simulates a utopia called " the City of Light . "
In this city , those who have died live on .
ALIE uses this chip to entice and control people .
Clarke had tried to get Luna , a missing Nightblood and rightful heir to the Commander throne ( as indicated by the tattoos on Lexa 's back ) , to accept the flame , but she refused .
Clarke is implanted with the flame with the help of a blood transfusion via a brain - dead Ontari , whose blood is compatible with the flame .
Clarke takes one of ALIE 's chips and enters the City of Light to stop ALIE from within .
She is protected by Lexa 's spirit and aided by Raven 's hacking against ALIE 's minions , leading her to a room resembling the Polaris space station , where Becca 's spirit shows her the kill switch to destroy ALIE .
Before Lexa sacrifices herself to get Clarke to safety , Clarke tells her that she loves her .
Lexa says that her spirit will always be with Clarke .
DEVELOPMENT CASTING AND CREATION Section::::Development .
Section::::Casting and creation .
Show creator Jason Rothenberg said he and others involved with the series were aware of Debnam - Carey while casting Clarke in 2014 ; although the chance for her to portray Clarke never materialized , her name was brought up while casting Lexa .
He called the casting a " no - brainer " ; she did not audition for the role , but was rather offered it .
At the time , Debnam - Carey was also being considered for the role of Alicia Clark on Fear the Walking Dead .
" That 's always a concern when you have an actor in your show that is popping — that someone else is going to grab them and make them a series regular if you do n't .
That 's kind of what happened in this case , " stated Rothenberg , who considered Debnam - Carey 's performance on The 100 " amazing " .
He added , " You know we ca n't compete on some level with the cache of a franchise like that , with the numbers . "
Debnam - Carey was allowed to continue work on both shows .
Rothenberg said he would have done the same
had it been the other way around , with creators asking to borrow one of his actors , and he would have done his best to make the situation work .
Of the dramatic shift from one show to the other , Debnam - Carey stated , " It was super weird , it was like ' I have no power anymore !
No weapons , no power ! '
But maybe eventually , Alica will be able to have her own kind of power .
" Lexa , with " such an iconic look and distinct wardrobe , " was an alien role for Debnam - Carey .
She stated , " I signed on for this role at a time in my personal and work life when there was a little bit of a lull period .
I was like , ' I do n't know what I 'm doing ! '
It was one of those actor freak - out moments . "
She said when the chance to portray Lexa presented itself , she was excited because of the quality of the show and its actors , and because the character allowed for a multifaceted dynamic ; this resulted in Lexa being the character she has favored portraying thus far . "
Thankfully , ( show creator )
Jason [ Rothenberg ] , the creative team , the writers , and the hair and make - up are very collaborative , " Debnam - Carey said .
" They 're really willing to create something .
And that 's what 's so lucky about this show .
It never started with expectation , so we 've been able to embrace it and really make it our own , and that 's been wonderful . "
Rothenberg said he and his crew do some research with regard to depicting societies , such as the Grounders , within the series , but most of what is shown is based on his personal tastes .
He enjoys the world - building aspect the most . "
Getting to create this universe from the language to the wardrobe to the tattoos ...
we obviously get pretty deep into what the grounder spirituality is and means , " he stated .
" All of that is pretty awesome .
So yes , we do some research as to how societies have evolved in the past but for the most part it 's fiction . "
Rothenberg said there are more than just men writing the show ; there are several women " writing hardcore sci - fi . "
In 2015 , two commander jackets were described as being " made out of leather , metal , and fur " .
Debnam - Carey felt that the Grounder culture — the language , wardrobe , makeup and " all the symbolic meaning behind that"—was " one of the highlights " for her .
" We explored it as much as we could as actors to break down its meaning , but the best thing about this was finally finding out all this backstory and fully creating this world , " she stated , adding they " had three sets built just for the Grounders " .
Dany Roth of blastr.com was impressed by the show 's costume designs , stating that they are " possibly the best on TV right now .
Each costume tells the story of the world , of the people , of the specific character . "
He said that , like Mad Max , The 100 " understands that the Grounders are repurposing tools and clothing from a time long dead .
But the costumes are far from uniform .
The people who lived on the ark , the people who live in the forest , the people who live in a frozen tundra , they all dress differently .
" , and although " there 's fashion here that makes the clothes exciting " , it is the clothes that tell the story .
" I 've said this many times before
and I 'll say it again here , " he added , " a good costume makes a good actor a great one .
Costumes make a show 's world real . "
Maureen Ryan of Variety , formerly of The Huffington Post , stated that the " most enduring image of Lexa is one of her sitting on a throne made of intertwined branches , her enigmatic eyes looking out from a face half - covered in elaborate war paint . "
Debnam - Carey said , " I 'm lucky they put me in such a badass costume and makeup .
It 's funny , we did a whole day of tests with that makeup .
We were like , ' Should we do this ?
Should we do tears ?
Should we do the bindi ? '
" She collaborated with Rothenberg on the makeup and wardrobe for her character , and both collaborated with viewers on fan versions of the designs .
When developing the character of Lexa further , the idea of her being romantically interested in women was pitched .
" It just made complete sense .
The moment , I think I 'm remembering it now , the moment was in Episode 9 when Lexa tells Clarke the story of Costia at the fire after the funeral , and she talks about Costia —
that was the first reference , I think , to her sexuality , " stated Rothenberg .
He " embraced it and [ ran ] with it . "
PERSONALITY AND PORTRAYAL Section::::Personality and portrayal .
The writers designed Lexa as a proud and wise warrior who keeps her feelings very guarded , and as someone who is usually unable to show she cares for people .
The vulnerability that results from caring , and particularly loving a person , is something she views as a weakness .
This was significantly exacerbated by the death of her girlfriend , Costia ; the anger , grief and subsequent dissipation of the grief hardened Lexa further .
In addition , having been selected commander involved her going through a brutal training process , as is their society 's custom ; if she shows weakness in her duties as a commander , she can lose the respect of her warriors .
Debnam - Carey said figuring out how to portray all these aspects of the character was the most challenging part . "
For me , it was about finding that mix between vulnerability and tension and a wiseness beyond her years , " she said .
A director advised her that less is more , and she adapted to the character , and learned more about her , via portrayal .
" I realized that I was slowly developing all of these things .
Someone was like , ' Is it a thing you 've chosen to do , to not blink all the time ? '
I was like , ' Wow ! '
When it comes to Lexa , she 's very steely - gazed , all the time .
There 's a presence about her and a knowingness , and she 's always observant .
"
By making calculated choices , she is used to getting what she wants .
Lexa is the first Grounder leader to seek peace , which Debnam - Carey described as " somewhat difficult " for the other Grounders to understand because of their " rough and aggressive " culture ; she is also " the first person to unite the 12 clans and to actually have the option of an alliance . "
Throughout , she is extremely loyal , but more so to her own people ; she puts them first regardless of the cost .
Debnam - Carey said " it 's in [ Lexa 's ] blood " to put her people first because they " are so close to her , that 's what she 's been groomed to be .
She comes from a really harsh culture and she has huge responsibilities .
" Lexa is " brutal and she 's a pragmatist , but not out of unkindness .
It 's all she 's ever known . "
Debnam - Carey did not view Lexa as a teenager , and did not assign her an age , stating , " It 's almost like she skipped that period .
She was placed in a position where suddenly she was forced to make a lot of hard choices that most people never have to make , no matter what their age is .
The 100 is a world where you do n't ever really get to be a kid . "
RELATIONSHIP WITH CLARKE Section::::Relationship with Clarke .
Lexa 's relationship with Clarke is presented as intense , complex , and the one thing that manages to soften Lexa 's outlook on life .
Debnam - Carey said the characters progression from being allies to becoming romantic " stems from a connection that they both share — which is similar experiences and similar positions " in that they are " both very young leaders with great authority , a lot of responsibility .
They have to lead a huge amount of people .
They have a lot of expectations riding on them . "
She said the sudden responsibilities they faced , the need to make the right decisions , and the fact they both grieved over past lovers helped connect them further , and it is a connection they do not have with others .
Rothenberg originally stated that while he would not go as far to say that it was love at first sight for Lexa , " it definitely was a bit of a thunderbolt moment for her when she first saw Clarke . "
He said Clarke 's attraction to Lexa " developed a little bit more slowly , but by the end [ ... ]
they were very much intrigued at the possibility of a romantic relationship .
" He later said " Lexa was definitely smitten — like love at first sight , probably " , but maintained it took longer for Clarke to develop romantic feelings for Lexa .
Debnam - Carey considered the characters being " very adaptable " as one of the interesting aspects of their dynamic .
Sacrifices the characters make are " for a much greater goal in the end " .
They have also " taken characteristics from each other , " with Lexa becoming more trusting and learning that love can be empowering , and Clarke becoming more ruthless .
" It 's very interesting to see the way they ebb and flow with each other , " said Debnam - Carey .
Of Lexa possibly putting Clarke first instead of her own people , she said perhaps if " Clarke was able to assimilate to their culture as well and become more of a right - hand man , then maybe I think Lexa could — then that would be a merger of two people .
"
Lexa 's weaknesses , as indicated by Debnam - Carey , are her feelings for her people and Clarke .
Debnam - Carey appreciated the fact the writers did not make a big deal of defining either characters ' sexuality or their romantic relationship .
Show creator Rothenberg said labels and gender are not a factor in the series , which Debnam - Carey viewed as true to the story . "
[ It 's ] just a world where people love people for who they are and not what they are and
that creates such a broad variety of characters .
It is representative of the world that we live in today , but it also does n't make it out to be this statement
— it 's not a social / cultural statement , " she said .
" It is just that in this world , some things are a little better after the apocalypse [ ... ]
It kind of represents , in a way , an ideal place where people love people and it does n't have to be a thing , which I think is really great .
"
Of the decision to have Lexa betray Clarke , a significant moment for the series that allowed the writers to strain the characters ' relationship , Rothenberg said Lexa was under the impression Clarke would likely die in the battle and Mount Weather would possibly remain to keep her people united .
" She was probably — master strategist that she is — thinking several moves ahead .
Thinking she could keep her alliance together , the 12 clans , because they would still have this evil empire out there to unite them , " he stated .
Lexa was not expecting Clarke to win , and to subsequently become a legend .
"
Everywhere she goes it 's like , '
I heard it was 5,000 people !
No , I heard it was 10,000 people ! '
Everywhere she goes , [ Clarke 's ] a legend now , " said Rothenberg .
" Certainly it means that her alliance now no longer has a real reason to be held together .
[ ... ] I 'm really excited to play out the ramifications of all of that .
"
Rothenberg said Clarke would eventually come to terms with the likelihood that , if she had been in a similar position as Lexa , she would have done the same thing : Protect her own people at all costs .
He said she did as much in the season 2 finale .
" That was kind of the theme of the entire season , which was how far can you go and still be the good guy in order to save your people .
Lexa had that choice in [ Episode ] 15 .
Obviously , it landed very emotionally for both of them , but especially on Clarke , " he stated .
" In [ Episode ] 16 , Clarke had a similar choice and I hope that over the course of the first part of [ season 3 ] , Clarke will eventually come to see it that way .
If she ca n't , then they 'll never figure out a way to make peace with each other " .
Debnam - Carey viewed the betrayal as a relief and release for herself as an actor , and as a " very honest " and " open " moment for Lexa .
" It 's the first real time you get to see — apart from [ them sharing a kiss]—this is a scene where she makes a really strong choice , but you can see that it 's hard for her to do , and she does care , " Debnam - Carey stated .
She said Clarke 's portrayer , Eliza Taylor , was " brilliant " and " great to work with and between the two of us , we were just very connected with each other and made sure that that was the strong force of that scene . "
To Debnam - Carey , Lexa " showing that she cared , even in that moment of betrayal " was Lexa being real .
Debnam - Carey argued that even though Lexa was upset by the betrayal , she is a very hardened person and her people continued to be her main concern .
She does not think Lexa was preoccupied with the repercussions .
Unlike Rothenberg , Debnam - Carey felt " [ Lexa ] always knew [ Clarke ] was going to [ survive ] .
Now those cards are back on the table , if she wants to restart an alliance or whatever else . "
RECEPTION GENERAL Section::::Reception .
Section::::General .
Lexa , and her relationship with Clarke , have been well received by critics and fans .
Maureen Ryan , writing for The Huffington Post , stated , " In a show packed with morally compromised characters , Lexa stood out ; she led a tribe of Earth inhabitants named Grounders with a combination of deftness , intelligence and unhesitating ferocity .
" Ryan felt Lexa " does not suffer fools gladly , yet Debnam - Carey made Lexa 's vulnerability and her attraction to Clarke Griffin ( Eliza Taylor ) not just believable , but engrossing . "
Linda Ge of TheWrap referred to her as a fan - favorite , while Eric Goldman of IGN called her " a standout , highly popular character " .
The staff for SheWired stated that she " had the best character introduction ever and never stopped being great " and " has proven to be endlessly engaging , even when she 's making choices that make us want to crawl into a ball and cry . "
Dana Piccoli of AfterEllen.com characterized Lexa as a " mysterious queer character " that has caught the audience 's attention , and complimented the " chemistry and increasing bond between Lexa and Clarke , " adding , " Both are smart , and somehow manage to see the bigger picture .
[ ... ] Here are two young women , leading their people to salvation or at least as close to salvation as they can get .
"
The A.V. Club 's Kyle Fowle reasoned that Lexa 's resolve while facing the reality of protecting the Sky People , the 13th clan , while risking an uprising from the other clans and her own people " is exactly what makes her one of the better characters on TV . "
Hypable.com 's Selina Wilken said that she was " one of the best and , yes , most divisive characters in recent TV history . "
Many viewers were upset by Lexa 's betrayal of Clarke , resulting in debates about why she may have done it , and Andy Swift of TVLine 's stating , " I 'm pretty sure I speak for Clarke , and all the angry viewers watching from home , when I say , ' Lexa , please meet a fiery death .
ASAP . ' "
Mariya Karimjee of Vulture viewed " the hurt and confusion that washed across Eliza Taylor 's face " during the betrayal as " one of the most powerful performances " she had seen on the show and said the heavy , emotional struggle came from both characters , with Clarke realizing " Lexa is the only person who understands her . "
Kyle Fowle of The A.V. Club stated that having the characters reunite after the betrayal , " allows for the show to dig into one of its most complex and compelling relationships .
Clarke and Lexa are a tangle of emotions and motivations .
[ ... ] They share a connection on an emotional level , a romantic level , and they recognize the burden of responsibility that they each have taken on .
"
Fowle felt " Clarke 's relative forgiveness of Lexa makes sense within the context of the war of her people , and the larger political conflict at hand .
When she kneels before Lexa [ ... ] , it 's loyalty informed by weeks of patient storytelling . "
Whether or not Lexa should be paired with Clarke was also debated , especially by fans of the Bellamy and Clarke relationship ( " Bellarke " ) , which is canon in the books .
This resulted in a rivalry between the fanbases .
In 2015 , Sydney Bucksbaum of E !
Online stated with regard to season 2 , " People who want to see Bellamy ( Bob Morley ) and Clarke ( Eliza Taylor ) get together — ahem , in every sense of the word — have had to suffer through a full season in which they were actually separated for pretty much the entire time . "
Rothenberg told Bucksbaum that he was not dismissing the pairing ; rather the Bellamy and Clarke romance was not yet the focus .
He said the show gives indications that Bellamy and Clarke care deeply for each other , and those wanting a romance at the time should read the books .
" We played with the Lexa / Clarke storyline [ in season 2 ] and that [ was ] still ongoing because both characters [ were ] still breathing , " stated Rothenberg .
" The journey is long , and eventually we 'll be able to tell that story in all its glory . "
He said when it came to whether or not the series would end with Clarke and Lexa as a couple , he would not comment on the matter and knew where he wanted the series to go , but he was always open to better ideas .
Eliza Taylor also weighed in on the matter , stating that she loves that bisexuality on the show is portrayed as normal , and that she also likes the chemistry between Bellamy and Clarke .
LGBT COMMUNITY Section::::LGBT community .
Clarke and Lexa 's relationship had a significant impact on the LGBT community .
Dalene Rovenstine of Entertainment Weekly stated that the series " has featured unexpected twists ( a baby in space !
a human harvest chamber !
cannibals ! )
, the shocking deaths of multiple main characters , and amounts of blood and gore you would n't expect to be approved on network TV .
But none of those moments have created a stir quite like [ ... ]
when [ Clarke and Lexa ] locked lips .
" The kiss was trending on Twitter after it aired , and many fans created artwork of the characters and couple as the series progressed ; others engaged in cosplay of Lexa ( dressing up like the character ) , with some receiving input from Debnam - Carey and Rothenberg .
Debnam - Carey was surprised by the attention .
She was new to Twitter and Instagram , and did not know what shipping ( the desire by fans for two people or fictional characters to be in a romantic or platonic relationship ) meant ; she saw that fans had given the pairing the portmanteau " Clexa " .
" I was on Instagram or something and I checked my tagged photos , and I realized that suddenly they were all LGBT artwork .
I was like , ' Oh , my god ! '
I had no idea .
It was the first time I realized I was a figure for that community , " said Debnam - Carey .
She called this " an honor " and " flattering , " and added , " It 's new for our society , as well .
It 's one of the first shows that really has two characters in the cast that are gender and sexually fluid and embraces that .
There are no labels .
It 's a wonderful thing to be a part of .
I 'm all for it . "
While at Paleyfest 2016 , she was made aware of fans raising money in her name for The Trevor Project , an organization for LGBT teenagers in need , and the fact that , at the time , $ 46,000 dollars had been raised .
When asked if she knew she had that much of an impact on the LGBT community , Debnam - Carey commented , " Not that much , no , that 's amazing . "
As of July 13 , 2016 , over $ 135,000 dollars have been raised .
Selina Wilken of Hypable.com appreciated that the show had " subtly introduced [ its ] first queer character " and that it is free of the other " big issues in today 's society , " like gender stereotyping , racism or misogyny , but felt the writers had been heteronormative with their romances before that point , which she characterized as " bizarre " for " an imagined future where marginalization " no longer exists . "
In a media landscape where gay , lesbian and bisexual characters are still often defined mainly by their sexuality , having Lexa — one of the show 's strongest , most well - liked characters — casually reveal that she 's queer and then carry on with her day sends a strong and important message to young viewers , " stated Wilken . "
However , there 's a big difference between having a supporting character ( however brilliant ) play the pronoun game , and actually featuring a same - sex pairing on the show . "
She said The CW did not have " a single queer main character on any of the network 's currently running shows " and that needed to change .
"
The next step , obviously , is the visual : The 100 has made it pretty clear that gender , race and sexuality are not issues worth bringing up in conversation , which is great , " said Wilken .
" But then , following this Show - Don't - Tell approach , how about actually featuring a same - sex pairing on the air ?
Give her a love interest , however fleeting .
The ball 's in your court , writers .
" To this point , Rothenberg had Clarke have sex with a different woman in season 3 ( while parted from Lexa ) to make it clear that Clarke is bisexual , ensuring she would be viewed as a lead LGBT character .
EXIT FROM THE SERIES
FAN REACTION Section::::Exit from the series .
Section::::Fan reaction .
With Debnam - Carey 's limited role on the series , Rothenberg contemplated how best to continue or end Lexa 's story .
When he chose to kill her off , this resulted in much animosity among the fanbase , with viewers and critics ( especially those who were upset or confused by the decision ) debating whether she was killed off for being lesbian , and whether she was killed off the right way ; many also felt the decision was a blow or slight to the LGBT community because of the view that it reinforced the " dead lesbian syndrome " ( or " bury your gays " ) trope , which posits that a lesbian couple ( or other same - sex couple ) on television or in film can never be happy for long , if at all , because one or both of them will soon die .
Viewers expressed their anger on Twitter , Tumblr , and other social media sites , with a number of them threatening to dox ( reveal personally identifiable information about ) the writers , others making death threats , and some stating they were suicidal after watching the episode ; people associated with the show immediately responded and tried to ease their thoughts , and defended the series by stating characters die on the show all the time .
A number of fans compared Clarke and Lexa 's final moments together to the death scene involving Willow Rosenberg and Tara Maclay from Buffy the Vampire Slayer , finding both moments unjust .
The " bury your gays " trope rose to a national debate , and the international fan - led initiatives " Lexa Deserved Better " and " LGBT Fans Deserve Better " emerged , initially dominating Twitter .
The Trevor Project was also borne out of the backlash , and had " raised more than $ 30,000 ( £ 21,000 ) in just a few hours . "
CRITICAL ANALYSES Section::::Critical analyses .
Calling the uproar messy , Caroline Framke of Vox said killing off Lexa " may have alienated part of [ the audience ] for good .
[ ... ] .
" She argued that " on the one hand , [ Lexa 's ] death was gut wrenching , and it unexpectedly brought together several disparate story strands in The 100 's floundering third season .
On the other , Lexa was an openly queer woman leading 12 armies , a rare sight for LGBTQ representation on television .
Less rare , unfortunately , is the trope of television and movies killing gay women off for shock value .
" Framke was especially critical of the show having Lexa die immediately after having sex and pillow talk with Clarke , which were long - awaited scenes ; to Framke , this signaled " sex , love , death " , particularly for lesbian couples .
Eric Goldman of IGN argued similarly , stating , " No , no , no , no , no .
[ ... ] If there 's one thing I truly hate about how Lexa 's death was handled , it 's this . "
Feeling that this setup was " really trite and cliché " , and made worse by the dead lesbian trope , he commented , " While I do n't think The 100 writers ever intended to imply ' sex = death , ' it ended up coming off that way . "
He felt fans of the couple " were truly manipulated and treated poorly " and that , given how important the couple was to people , they deserved more time to see them happy .
" To the LGBTQ fandom who looked at Lexa as important , I can sympathize , " he said , " but as a straight white male , I would n't dream of saying ' I totally get it . ' "
Goldman , like Framke , however , felt Lexa 's death was a good opportunity to propel the show 's story of artificial intelligence ( AI ) with respect to Lexa forward .
" If The 100 is smart — and it usually is — Lexa 's death will be the defining moment of the season , " he said .
Variety 's Maureen Ryan , who expected Lexa to eventually die , and called Clarke and Lexa 's love and deathbed scenes spectacular , said the season had been rushed and Lexa 's death after sex with Clarke " was another case of the show compressing a timeline to an unfortunate degree .
"
Ryan argued that the way a character dies matters , particularly for LGBTQ characters , given their under - representation and misrepresentation in the media .
She listed scenarios with pros and cons about how the show might have better played out the Lexa factor , including the suggestion of Lexa never being in season 3 .
While Bethonie Butler of The Washington Post stated that part of what fueled the outrage is that The 100 was thought to be " progressive in its treatment of LGBT characters , " and so the death led to feelings of betrayal , Hypable.com 's Selina Wilken said that " Season 3 did a lot to build Lexa up before her fall , turning her into an almost King Arthur - like figure of salvation in this broken world , at least partly in an effort to blind - sight and devastate the audience when she died .
( And ... mission accomplished , all too well . )
" Butler added , " The controversy reveals the pitfalls of a show misunderstanding its audience and the politics of minority representation onscreen . "
Trish Bendix of AfterEllen.com , on the other hand , challenged the outrage , stating that while LGBT visibility matters , fictional characters of color ( including transgender characters of color ) do not get a tenth of the attention that white television characters do .
She hoped to see viewers care more about these characters going forward .
The A.V. Club 's Kyle Fowle felt that while " it 's certainly frustrating to see one of TV 's prominent lesbian characters written off so hastily , " the show made Lexa 's death mean something .
In his opinion , episode " Thirteen " is " a remarkable episode , one that deepens the mythology of The 100 while also delivering on a number of character threads that have been left dangling for much of this season so far . "
Damian Holbrook of TV Insider argued that , despite assertions to the contrary , television writers and producers never hastily kill off a character .
" They are humans who come to love their casts and their characters as much as we do , but they are also ultimately telling a story . "
Liz Shannon Miller of IndieWire opined , " The outrage over the show falling prey to the ' lesbian death trope ' was epic — in a season full of death , Lexa became an icon for how LGTBQ characters and characters of color seem to die an awful lot more than others . "
TV Guide listed the death as one of the most important television moments of 2016 , arguing that while Lexa was not a main character , she " was critically important to a portion of the population who watched the show : a strong , proudly LGBT character whose sexuality was only a part of who she was -- a rarity on TV . " , and that her death " sparked a year - long discussion about how , and why , this trope must change . "
CREATOR AND PORTRAYER COMMENTARY Section::::Creator and portrayer commentary .
Rothenberg said he had not always planned on killing Lexa , but the fact that Debnam - Carey was simultaneously on another show ( Fear the Walking Dead ) , and was therefore unlikely to ever become a series regular on The 100 , he felt use of the character would be limited or absent in the future .
This is when the writers decided to craft a death scene for her to propel the story forward .
" I remember as we were breaking the season , we talked about reincarnation in the Grounder world and how that was how commanders were selected .
I did n't want to throw that out as nonsense , which is how Clarke had received it , but I also did n't want to say that it was real reincarnation , " he said , adding he had been reading The Singularity Is Near by Ray Kurzweil at the time , which " talks quite a bit about a future where we 'll be able to upload our minds — literally upload our consciousness — into a computer and live forever .
"
This gave Rothenberg the idea for incorporating a " technological reincarnation " storyline .
" The commander A.I. would need to be able to pass itself from person to person over time and [ ... ]
Lexa was just the most recent recipient of this artificial intelligence augmentation of her consciousness .
So once we came up with that idea , that was the point at which everything jelled and sort of came together storytelling - wise , " he stated .
" And of course , if you 're dealing with a story about reincarnation , you 've got to die before you can be reincarnated .
So Lexa dying became a very tragic necessity . "
Rothenberg said Clarke was in love with Lexa , that they were soulmates , and Lexa 's death will haunt Clarke . "
[ She ] is going to have to figure out how to compartmentalize , the way that all of us have to do in the real world when people are suddenly and tragically taken away from us , " he added .
" That 's kind of the point of The 100 in many ways .
These horrible things happen and yet we still have to figure out a way to move on and be the heroes of our own stories . "
Debnam - Carey thanked Lexa 's creators , and said , " It has been an honour to portray [ Lexa ] .
To envelop myself in her skin .
To be given the freedom to represent a moment in our cultural and social zeitgeist — she has left a great imprint on me .
I will miss her .
May we meet again . "
While at Paleyfest 2016 promoting Fear the Walking Dead , she addressed Lexa 's death publicly for the first time .
In an interview with Entertainment Weekly , she said she was " surprised by the intensity and the fury " that came from fans
and she did not think " anyone on the show expected such social outcry .
"
To Debnam - Carey , " any attention we can draw to a movement like that is an amazing thing , and is a great thing to pursue and keep working towards .
"
She emphasized Lexa 's death never came from a place of hate or negativity from the writers or Rothenberg , or anyone in the crew , and the death was purely a creative decision made due to her obligations to Fear the Walking Dead .
" I know obviously that it 's hard when there are social issues going on and maybe they were dealt with in an insensitive way for some people , " stated Debnam - Carey . "
And I hate that people feel like that .
That 's really awful if people feel ostracized or targeted . "
At her second Q&A panel weekend at Copenhagen Comic - Con , she said , " It saddens me to think that this was an event that tarnished the show . "
The fan outcry and subsequent discussions over Lexa 's death led several screenwriters and producers to sign the Lexa Pledge , a pledge promising to treat gay and lesbian characters in future plotlines with consideration to their emotional and cultural impact .
Some have argued that this stifles creativity and the freedom to develop characters and stories , while others have welcomed the debate , even if they have not signed the pledge .
Although Rothenberg said he was " very sorry for not recognizing [ the " bury your gays " trope ] as fully as [ he ] should have " , he would have still killed off Lexa ; he would have written it in a way that does not perpetuate the trope , such as death after sex .
He said that while he understands the argument that Lexa should have had a heroic death , having such a powerful character die by a stray bullet was more realistic because it signifies that anyone can be in the wrong place at the wrong time .
Javier Grillo - Marxuach , who wrote the episode , said , " I do n't think that the failure here was to discuss [ Lexa 's death ] , the failure was to recognize the cultural impact it would have outside the show [ ... ]
I am grateful for the tidal wave that came down on me .
The activism that goes on online is [ very ] important . "
REFERENCES