JIGSAW ( 2017 FILM )
Jigsaw is a 2017 American horror film directed by Michael and Peter Spierig , written by Josh Stolberg and Peter Goldfinger , and starring Matt Passmore , Callum Keith Rennie , Clé Bennett , Hannah Emily Anderson , and Laura Vandervoort .
It is the eighth installment in the Saw franchise , picking up over a decade after the death of the eponymous Jigsaw killer , during the police investigation of a new succession of murders that fit his modus operandi .
Saw 3D ( 2010 ) was originally deemed the final installment of the series , before Lionsgate Films commissioned the production of Jigsaw from a pitch by Stolberg and Goldfinger .
Filming began in November 2016 , with post - production following in January .
The film was released in the United States on October 27 , 2017 .
Despite receiving generally unfavorable reviews from critics , the film was a commercial success , grossing $ 103 million worldwide against a $ 10 million budget .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Ten years after the death of John Kramer , criminal Edgar Munsen is shot and apprehended by Detectives Hunt and Halloran after activating a remote trigger .
Meanwhile , five people – Mitch , Anna , Ryan , Carly , and an unconscious man , are held captive in a barn with shackles around their necks .
A tape recording from Kramer explains they must give a sacrifice of blood , and confess their sins .
The chains pull them towards a wall of buzzsaws .
Most of the group survive by cutting themselves to offer blood , but the unconscious man awakens too late to escape .
Their next test reveals that Carly is a purse snatcher who accidentally caused the death of an asthmatic woman .
To save the others from being hanged , she must inject herself with one of three needles – one containing an antidote to a poison in her system , one containing saline , and one containing acid .
Ryan stabs Carly with all three to save himself , killing her .
Halloran and Detective Hunt investigate the discovery of bodies that appear to be the unnamed man and Carly .
Halloran becomes suspicious of pathologists Logan Nelson , a veteran and former doctor whose wife was killed two years prior , and Eleanor Bonneville .
Munsen goes missing from the hospital .
His body is found inside John Kramer 's grave when it is exhumed by the police .
Ryan 's leg is ensnared by wires , while Anna and Mitch become trapped inside a silo .
A recording explains they will be killed by being buried under falling grains unless Ryan pulls a lever .
Ryan pulls the lever , severing his leg while saving Anna and Mitch .
Eleanor reveals to Logan that she is an obsessive fangirl of the Jigsaw case , and has built replicas of his traps in her studio .
She 's worried this might incriminate her .
Hunt follows them , and informs Halloran .
The next test reveals Mitch sold a motorcycle with a faulty brake to Kramer 's nephew , resulting in his death .
Mitch will be killed by a spiral - shaped blade unless he can reach a brake .
Anna attempts to help him , but he is killed .
Halloran finds a corpse appearing to be Mitch in Anna 's studio , and calls for Logan and Eleanor 's arrest .
Logan convinces Hunt to let them go , as both suspect Halloran .
Eleanor deduces the game 's location , and she and Logan depart for the barn .
Halloran pursues them .
Meanwhile , Hunt finds pieces of flesh in Halloran 's freezer , fitting Jigsaw 's M.O. , and implicating him as the killer .
Anna is drugged while attempting to escape , and awakens to find herself and Ryan chained in a room with a still - living Kramer .
Kramer reveals that Anna suffocated her baby and framed her husband , while Ryan accidentally caused the death of several friends in a car accident .
Kramer tells them they have gotten his message " backwards . "
He places a shotgun between them , and tells them it is the " key " to their survival .
Anna attempts to shoot Ryan , but the gun backfires and kills her .
Ryan realizes that the keys to his and Anna 's chains were in the gun , and destroyed when Anna fired it , leaving him to die .
Logan and Eleanor are ambushed by Halloran at the barn .
Eleanor escapes , while Halloran is drugged by an unseen assailant .
Logan and Halloran awaken in collars rigged with laser cutters .
They are told to confess their sins to survive , and may choose who goes first .
Halloran forces Logan to go first .
Logan confesses that he mislabeled Kramer 's X - rays years prior , causing his cancer to go undiagnosed .
Despite confessing , Logan is killed .
Next , Halloran admits to allowing criminals to walk free for personal gain .
His collar deactivates .
Logan reveals that he is still alive , and that the barn game took place ten years prior .
He was the man who appeared to die in the first game , but Kramer saved him , and recruited him as his first apprentice .
The bodies that were found were actually the bodies of criminals Halloran allowed to walk free , which Logan placed into the same tests .
Logan also reveals that Munsen , one of the criminals Halloran let go , killed his wife .
However , because Halloran broke the rules and forced Logan to go first , he will die , and be framed as the killer .
Logan reactivates the collar around Halloran 's neck , killing him .
CAST
* Matt Passmore as Logan Nelson * Callum Keith Rennie as Detective Halloran * Clé Bennett as Detective Keith Hunt
* Hannah Emily Anderson as Eleanor Bonneville * Laura Vandervoort as Anna * Paul Braunstein as Ryan * Mandela Van Peebles as Mitch * Brittany Allen as Carly * Josiah Black as Edgar Munsen * Tobin Bell as John Kramer / Jigsaw
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Saw 3D was intended to be the final Saw film .
The film was set to be split into two parts , but Lionsgate only allowed the filmmakers to make one more film after Saw VI under - performed at the box office .
According to Saw 3D writers Marcus Dunstan and Patrick Melton , because of the change , " the big reveal of Dr. Gordon was a bit underserved ... perhaps creating more questions than answers .
There were several ideas [ we ] never quite figured out .
But [ I ] do n't want to say what they were , because you never know what might happen in the future . "
After the intended conclusion , Lionsgate ceased making Saw films , while waiting to hear a pitch that they thought made it worthwhile to resurrect the series .
Jigsaw was conceived when writers Josh Stolberg and Peter Goldfinger , who had spent two years pursuing the opportunity to write a Saw entry , proposed their vision .
It became known in July 2016 that brothers Michael and Peter Spierig would direct the film .
The producers Mark Burg and Oren Koules had also produced the previous entries in the Saw series .
Composer Charlie Clouser has described the film as a " reinvention " of the series , opining that " the Spierig brothers can deliver a fresh take on the material that will establish a new story line and new characters that can carry the saga into the future .
" The directors further detailed their approach as being " Saw for 2017 " , and Michael Spierig explained , " It 's perhaps not quite as vicious , and more fun .
But it 's still full of gore , that 's for sure .
It 's got a really great mystery , and there are very interesting twists . "
FILMING Section::::Filming .
In October 2016 , production was confirmed to have commenced under the working title of Saw : Legacy .
The film was shot in Toronto in November 2016 , and entered post - production by January .
On March 2 , 2017 , Bloody Disgusting revealed the first plot details and a full actor list , confirming that Tobin Bell would return in the role of John Kramer .
In June 2017 , the Motion Picture Association of America listed the film under the official title of Jigsaw , rating it R , for " sequences of grisly bloody violence and torture , and for language " .
On August 14 , 2017 , the film passed uncut in the United Kingdom with an 18 Certificate by the BBFC .
In regard to the new title , writer Josh Stolberg clarified that " when a writer is writing a movie , they put something on the cover page to separate it from other films .
So when we were writing this film , the title read Saw :
Legacy but it was never official or ' decided ' . "
MARKETING
POSTER RELEASES
Section::::Marketing .
Section::::Poster releases .
On September 16 , 2017 , Lionsgate released five posters to promote Jigsaw .
The posters show off people in the traditional Billy the Puppet makeup , captioned " He is Everything .
He is Everywhere .
He is Everyone " .
The release of the posters was Lionsgate 's way of reasserting the series ' dominance over the Halloween season .
HALLOWEEN BLOOD DRIVE Section::::Halloween Blood Drive .
The Annual Blood Drive is the series ' tradition , where before the release of the films in October , mobile blood stations are set up around the United States , where fans who donate blood receive a free ticket to see the respective film of that year .
The tradition started in 2004 , after the overwhelming success of Saw , and continued for each of the sequels until it stopped in 2009 before the release of Saw VI .
Due to the arrival of Jigsaw in October , the blood drive was revived for another year , promoting the film with eight posters released by Lionsgate , featuring " Nurses " Grae Drake , Dan Rockwell , Susanne Bartch , Nyakim Gatwech , Shaun Dross , Mosh , Mykie , and Amanda LePore .
As of September 2017 , 120,000 pints ( 57,000 L ) of blood had been donated , which has led to over 360,000 lives being saved .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Charlie Clouser , who provided the score for all previous entries in the Saw series , returned to score Jigsaw .
Clouser re - imagined the music of the Saw franchise , following the six - year hiatus between Saw 3D and Jigsaw .
Clouser stated in 2016 , " this will be an opportunity [ for me ] to re - imagine how [ I ] approach the score , and [ I ] will be trying a more stark , bold , and stripped - down approach that will be more in line with the strong vision that the Spierig brothers are bringing to the table .
" The soundtrack of the movie was distributed digitally on 27 October 2017 .
Some tracks from the film can also be found on Volume 2 of the Saw Anthology Collection .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Jigsaw was released in the United Kingdom on October 26 , 2017 , and in the United States theatrically on October 27 , 2017 .
It was featured in IMAX screenings for the first week of its theatrical run .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
Jigsaw has grossed $ 38.1 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 64.9 million in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 103 million , against a production budget of $ 10 million .
In the United States and Canada , Jigsaw was released alongside Thank You for Your Service and Suburbicon , and is projected to gross around $ 20 million from 2,941 theaters in its opening weekend .
It made $ 1.6 million from Thursday night previews at 2,400 theaters , just below the $ 1.7 million Saw 3D made from midnight screenings seven years prior , and $ 7.2 million on its first day .
It went on to open to $ 16.64 million , finishing first at the box office but marking the second lowest debut of the franchise .
In its second weekend the film dropped 61 % to $ 6.56 million , finishing third behind newcomers and A Bad Moms Christmas .
In its third weekend , the film dropped another 47 % and made $ 3.43 million , finishing fifth .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 35 % based on 79 reviews , with an average rating of 4.8/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Jigsaw definitely wo n't win many converts to the Saw franchise , but for longtime fans , it should prove a respectably revolting — if rarely scary — diversion . "
On Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating to reviews , the film has a weighted average score of 39 out of 100 , based on 18 critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B " on an A+ to F scale , while PostTrak reported women under-25 ( 21 % of the film 's audience ) and older males ( 30 % ) gave it a 76 % and 70 % overall positive score , respectively .
IGN gave the film a score of 4.5/10 , writing " The good news is , Jigsaw is not the worst horror movie of the year .
The bad news is , it 's still bad enough that that 's the good news ...
[It ] does n't capture what made the Saw franchise work in the first place . "
Darren French of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a " C " , calling it disappointing and overly long .
Bloody Disgusting gave the film two and a half out of five , saying the film " while being a fun ride , fails to justify its existence with a story that is overly familiar and a twist that does n't live up to most of its predecessors . "
Varietys Owen Gleiberman found the film " garishly rote " saying " For 92 minutes , it more or less succeeds in sawing through your boredom , slicing and dicing with a glum explicitness that raises the occasional tingle of gross - out suspense but no longer carries any kick of true shock value . "
Germain Lussier of io9 largely panned the film saying " [ it ] is one of the better films in the franchise .
Unfortunately , that 's not saying much . "
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Jigsaw was released digitally on January 9 , 2018 , and on 4 K Ultra HD Blu - ray , Blu - ray , and DVD on January 23 , 2018 .
SEQUEL
Section::::Sequel .
On January 16 , 2018 , Lionsgate were reported to have begun discussing a ninth installment , for which the Spierig brothers would not be returning .
On April 3 , 2018 , Twisted Pictures were publicized to have begun actively developing a sequel with writers Pete Goldfinger and Josh Stolberg .
SEE ALSO
* List of horror films of the 2010s REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS