SURFACE PEN
The Surface Pen is an active stylus and digital pen developed by Microsoft for its series of Surface computing devices .
It is designed to showcase the pen computing capabilities of Microsoft 's Windows 8/8.1 and Windows 10 operating systems .
FIRST GENERATION Section::::First generation .
The first Surface Pen was introduced in 2012 alongside the Surface Pro , which uses Penabled technology designed by Wacom .
It features one physical button on the side to simulate a right - click when the pen comes into contact with the display , as well as an eraser tip at the top of the Pen that removes ink strokes when it comes into contact with the display .
It was bundled with the Surface Pro and Surface Pro 2 , but is not compatible with other models .
Although the technology was deprecated with subsequent generations and is now branded as " Pro Pen " , it can still be purchased as an accessory for the Surface Pro and Surface Pro 2 as well as other Penabled - compatible devices such as those from Lenovo ThinkPad lineup .
SECOND
GENERATION SURFACE PRO 3 Section::::Second generation .
Section::::Surface Pro 3 .
A new version of the Surface Pen was launched in 2014 with the Surface Pro 3 .
Based on technology developed by N - trig ( a separate company at the time , though subsequently acquired by Microsoft ) , the Surface Pro 3 version lacks the eraser tip present in the previous generation ; erasing is done by drawing over the ink strokes while holding down one of two physical buttons on the side , above the button used for right - clicking .
A third button , located in place of the eraser tip , sends a Bluetooth signal to a paired Surface PC which instantly opens OneNote , even when the device is locked ( although advanced editing functions are disabled in this case ) .
Unlike the Wacom - powered Surface Pen , it requires two batteries : one AAAA battery for stylus operation , and two size 319 coin cell batteries for the top button .
The pen is included with all Surface Pro 3s but is also compatible with and available as an optional accessory for the Surface 3 .
It is also compatible with all subsequent Surface PCs , which uses the same basic technology .
Surface Pro 3 Pen is able to detect 256 levels of pressure on its tip .
Model numbers are 3UY-00001 ( Silver ) , 3UY-00012 ( Black ) , 3UY-00021 ( Red ) , 3UY-00030 ( Blue ) .
THIRD GENERATION SURFACE PRO 4
Section::::Third generation .
Section::::Surface Pro 4 .
With the release of the Surface Pro 4 , Microsoft introduced an updated version of the Surface Pen .
While using the same technology to the Surface Pro 3 pen , it has only one ( non - customizable ) button on the side rather than two , and brings back the top - mounted eraser ( retaining the button functionality ) and also allows customizing the button ( called the " magic button " ) to perform different actions .
The default options are : single - click opens OneNote , double - click takes a screenshot , press - and - hold launches Cortana .
This version of the pen is bundled with the Surface Pro 4 , the Surface Book and the Surface Studio , it can also be purchased separately for the Surface Laptop .
It is also compatible with the Surface Pro 3 and Surface 3 .
Surface Pro 4 is able to detect 1024 levels of pressure on its tip .
Latency drops to just 45 milliseconds in compare with Surface Pro 3 Pen .
Model numbers are 3XY-00001 ( Silver ) , 3XY-00011 ( Black ) , 3XY-00021 ( Dark Blue ) and 3XY-00051 ( Gold ) .
A set of 4 interchangeable pen tips were included with this pen , but only made available as an option ( Model RJ3 - 00003 ) for the fourth generation pen .
The tips are marked using the same nomenclature used for pencil hardness 2H , H , HB , B. SURFACE HUB Section::::Surface Hub .
The Surface Hub , released in June 2015 , ships with a pair of digital pens that employ technology similar to the Surface Pen for PCs .
Holstered to each side of the device , they have eraser tips but no extra buttons .
They integrate with the built - in Whiteboard app and , unlike the Surface Pen , can both be used for simultaneously inking by multiple users .
FOURTH GENERATION SURFACE PRO ( 2017 EDITION )
Section::::Fourth generation .
Section::::Surface Pro ( 2017 edition ) .
With the release of the Surface Pro 2017 edition , Microsoft introduced an updated version of the Surface Pen .
Unlike previous generations of the Surface Pen , this version of the pen is sold separately at a higher price of $ 99 .
It is also compatible with Surface Pro , Surface Go , Surface Studio , Surface Book , Surface Book 2 , Surface Laptop , Surface Pro 3 , Surface Pro 4 and Surface 3 .
The new Surface Pen is able to detect 4096 levels of pressure and has 1024 levels of tilt sensitivity , which was not available on previous generations .
It has 21 milliseconds of latency , which , as Microsoft claims , makes it " the fastest digital pen on the planet . "
Model numbers are EYU-00001 ( Black ) , EYU-00009 ( Platinum ) , EYU-00017 ( Cobalt Blue ) and EYU-00025 ( Burgundy ) .
SEE ALSO
* Microsoft hardware * Digital pen * Apple Pencil *
Pen computing
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Surface Pen - official website