THE NIGHT SHIFT ( SEASON 3 )
The third season of the Medical drama series The Night Shift debuted on June 1 , 2016 and concluded on August 31 , 2016 , on NBC in the United States .
It is produced by Sachs / Judah Productions , and Sony Pictures Television with series creators Gabe Sachs and Jeff Judah serving as executive producers .
This season contained 13 episodes .
The series follows the overnight shift at San Antonio Medical Center , where three of the surgeons have a connection to the U.S. military .
Dr. Thomas Charles " T.C. " Callahan ( Eoin Macken ) , an ex - army medic who often butts heads with his former girlfriend , Dr. Jordan Alexander ( Jill Flint ) and the hospital administrator , Dr. Topher Zia ( Ken Leung ) , also an ex - army medic .
Meanwhile , Dr. Alexander hires a new intern , Dr. Shannon Rivera ( Tanaya Beatty ) , while Dr. Drew Alister ( Brendan Fehr ) has returned stateside after an incident overseas .
Other doctors that are on the shift include surgeons Dr. Paul Cummings ( Robert Bailey Jr. ) , who struggles to come out of his father 's shadow while developing possible romantic feelings for Dr. Rivera , and Dr. Scott Clemmens , a recovering alcoholic and head of the surgery department .
CAST MAIN CAST
* Eoin Macken as Dr. TC Callahan * Jill Flint as
Dr. Jordan Alexander
* Ken Leung as Dr. Topher Zia
* Brendan Fehr as Dr. Drew Alister
* Robert Bailey Jr. as Dr. Paul Cummings *
JR Lemon as
ER Nurse Kenny Fournette
* Scott Wolf as Dr. Scott Clemmens
* Tanaya Beatty as Dr. Shannon Rivera RECURRING CAST * Esodie Geiger as Nurse Molly Ramos
* Alma Sisneros as Nurse Jocelyn Diaz
* Catharine Pilafas as Nurse Bardocz * Luke MacFarlane as Rick Lincoln * Merle Dandridge as Gwen Gaskin * Jennifer Beals as Dr. Syd Jennings
*
Sarah Jane Morris as Annie Callahan * AnnaLynne McCord as Jessica Sanders * Michael Cassidy as Sam * Kyla Kenedy as Brianna * Briana Marin as Nina Alvarez * Mac Brandt as Mac Reily GUEST CAST
* Lindsey Morgan as Kryztal
* Elizabeth Sung as Sumei Zia
* Lance Henriksen as Clive * China Anne McClain as Lauren * Carla Gallo as Hannah PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Gabe Sachs revealed on Twitter that the first day of the writer 's room for season 3 of The Night Shift was on November 17 , 2015 .
Sachs said that shooting for the third season would commence in February , and later Jill Flint announced that filming would start on February 1 , 2016 .
The sets began going up on December 15 , 2015 .
Actors Robert Bailey Jr. , Brendan Fehr , and Jill Flint arrived in Albuquerque , NM to begin filming on January 24 , 2016 .
The first production meeting took place on January 27 , 2016 , and location scouting took place the day before .
Production on the third season began on February 1 , 2016 in Albuquerque , NM .
For the third consecutive season , the show will be filmed at Albuquerque Studios , and filming is expected to take place from February to June 2016 .
The tax incentives offered were cited as the main reason for filming in New Mexico , rather than in San Antonio .
The show will employ about 130 New Mexico - based crew members , and approximately 500 New Mexico background talent .
The first scene of the season filmed on February 2 , 2016 .
The show filmed in a casino for part of one episode .
Creator Gabe Sachs has said that this season would be more San Antonio - centric than either of the previous seasons .
The Pearl Brewery , a local brewery , would be where the characters hang out after work , as well as " little taco places . "
Also , the costume department purchased T - shirts from local San Antonio locales such as , " Hogwild Records " and " Tapes on Main Avenue , " because Sachs thought that " it would be cool if characters wore them " on screen .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
On July 15 , 2015 , it was revealed that Scott Wolf who portrays Dr. Scott Clemmens had been promoted to series regular for the third season .
On January 21 , 2016 , Deadline reported that Jennifer Beals had been cast as a recurring character named Doctor Syd Jennings .
She will be introduced in the season 3 premiere as a Major in the Army who " has worked with the Culture Support Teams ( CST ) in conjunction with Ranger and Special Forces . "
On February 2 , 2016 , actress Tanaya Beatty was cast as a new series regular named Dr. Shannon Rivera , a recent med school graduate who impresses Dr. Alexander enough to recruit her as her intern .
Melissa Gilbert and Sarah Jane Morris will both be returning for the third season .
Freddy Rodriguez , who portrays hospital administrator Michael Ragosa , revealed on Twitter that he would not be returning for the third season of The Night Shift , as he is starring in a new CBS drama pilot Bull .
Jeananne Goossen who portrayed Krista Bell - Heart , is also not returning for the third season ; she says that she split " amicably " from the show .
On March 21 , 2016 , it was revealed that 90210 alum AnnaLynne McCord had been cast as a recurring character named Jessica Sanders , " a striking and driven pharamaceutical rep who 's always looking for a way to make a deal .
" She will first appear in the fifth episode of the season , and in at least 3 additional episodes .
Lindsey Morgan will appear in a guest role as Kryztal , " a high - strung bride whose injury in a wedding - day accident reveals a deeper and more complicated medical problem . "
EPISODES Section::::Episodes .
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
The Night Shift airs on Global TV in Canada , and on Universal Channel in Australia .
On September 23 , 2015 , Season 1 premiered in India on Colors Infinity , and in Korea , season 3 episodes will premiere right after their U.S. airing on Olleh TV .
The show premiered in the United Kingdom on January 12 , 2016 , on Sky UK .
REFERENCES