HUNT FOR THE WILDERPEOPLE Hunt for the Wilderpeople is a 2016 New Zealand adventure comedy - drama film written and directed by Taika Waititi , whose screenplay was based on the book Wild Pork and Watercress by Barry Crump .
Carthew Neal , Leanne Saunders , Matt Noonan , and Waititi produced the film .
Sam Neill and Julian Dennison play " Uncle " Hector and Ricky Baker , a father figure and son who become the targets of a manhunt after fleeing into the New Zealand bush .
The film premiered at the 2016 Sundance Film Festival on 22 January 2016 .
The film opened across New Zealand on 31 March 2016 .
The film received a limited North American release on 24 June 2016 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Ricky Baker ( Dennison ) , a juvenile delinquent who was abandoned by his mother , is taken by child welfare services officer Paula and police officer Andy , to live in a remote farm with foster mother Bella and her husband , the cantankerous southern man
Hec ( Neill ) .
Hec is remote , but Bella quickly manages to break through Ricky 's defensive shell by taking him hunting and giving him a dog for his 13th birthday , which he names Tupac after his idol Tupac Shakur .
When Bella suddenly dies and Hec tells Ricky that child services will take him back , Ricky ineptly fakes his suicide by burning a barn and runs away into the bush with Tupac , where he is completely unable to cope and gets lost .
Hec finds him easily but breaks his ankle in a fall , forcing the two to camp for a period of time .
The authorities meanwhile have found the house empty and the barn burnt down , and come to the conclusion that the bereaved and mentally unstable Hec has abducted Ricky .
The impression is strengthened after an encounter with three foolish hunters who get the idea that Hec is molesting Ricky .
Hec reveals to Ricky that he has served prison time for manslaughter and is illiterate .
Ricky , in turn , says his only friend in foster care has died and that his only options are risking the same fate in the foster system , or serve time in juvenile prison .
The pair agree to disappear into the bush .
A national manhunt ensues , and the two slowly bond while working together to escape arrest .
Upon finding another hut , they encounter an unconscious , diabetic ranger .
Ricky leaves to find help and runs into a girl his age named Kahu .
She takes him back to her house and introduces him to her dad .
Ricky stays the night and returns next morning to the hut where Hec was supposed to be .
Ricky finds the place to be swarming with police , led by Paula .
Ricky runs away .
He later encounters Paula and Andy in the bush , separated by a ravine .
Paula attempts to bribe Ricky , asking him to say that Hec was a sex offender .
In return , she tells him that he wo n't ever go to juvenile prison .
Ricky declines and runs away .
Ricky catches up to Hec by remembering the survival strategies Hec taught him , and they continue their travels .
After a traumatic encounter with a wild boar during which Hec 's dog Zag is mortally wounded , forcing Hec to euthanize her , Ricky reveals he has been carrying Bella 's ashes and originally planned to deliver them to " where the earth wets the cloak of the sky , " as per her wishes .
They scatter Bella 's ashes into a remote waterfall high in a mountain range .
Ricky and Hec find a man living out on his own called Psycho Sam ( Darby ) .
Sam lets them stay the night .
After five months of surviving in the wilderness and several close calls , they are finally caught following a car and helicopter chase , and Ricky accidentally shoots Hec .
Hec gets remanded and Ricky is taken in by Kahu 's family .
After Hec 's release from jail , Ricky , with his new foster family 's permission , returns to the bush with Hec to photograph the huia , an extinct bird they had re - discovered during their time on the run .
CAST * Sam Neill as " Uncle " Hec Faulkner * Julian Dennison as Ricky Baker
*
Rima Te Wiata as " Aunt " Bella * Rachel House as Paula , a child welfare worker
* Rhys Darby as Psycho Sam * Oscar Kightley as Andy , a police officer
* Tioreore Ngatai - Melbourne as Kahu
* Troy Kingi as TK * Cohen Holloway as Hugh PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Waititi first began to adapt the book Wild Pork and Watercress in 2005 , and completed multiple different drafts .
The early drafts stayed true to the book , with characters dying , however this was revised in later versions .
Julian Dennison was cast by Waititi from earlier work they did together on a commercial .
The film had a budget of approximately NZ$4.5 million , of which $ 2 million came from the New Zealand Film Commission .
The film was shot over 5 weeks , in locations including the Central Plateau and the Waitakere Ranges .
Almost the entire film was shot using a single camera .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film premiered at the 2016 Sundance Film Festival on 22 January 2016 and was released in cinemas on 31 March 2016 in New Zealand by Madman Entertainment and The Orchard .
The film was released on DVD and Blu - ray in America on 25 October 2016 by Sony Pictures Home Entertainment .
The soundtrack by Moniker was released on 8 April 2016 by Majestical Pictures Ltd. RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The film grossed NZ$1,263,000 in New Zealand on its opening weekend , the highest grossing opening weekend for a New Zealand film , ahead of What Becomes of the Broken Hearted?s $ 912,000 .
It has become the highest grossing New Zealand film , making over NZ$12 million .
Internationally , as of October 2016
the film has grossed $ 10,935,319 ( AUD ) in Australia , in the UK $ 507,380 ( USD ) and $ 5,137,201 ( USD ) in North America .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On Rotten Tomatoes , Hunt for the Wilderpeople received a score of 97 % , based on 169 reviews , with an average rating of 7.9/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads : "
The charmingly offbeat Hunt for the Wilderpeople unites a solid cast , a talented filmmaker , and a poignant , funny , deeply affecting message .
"
On Metacritic , the film has a score of 81 out of 100 , based on 30 reviews , indicating " universal acclaim " .
In his review , Hamish Popplestone remarked : " Though both flawed , Neill 's and Dennison 's characters are so , so charming on - screen and are fully apt at weaving through the dramatic , comedic , and sad points of the script . "
Empire magazine named Hunt for the Wilderpeople the number one film for 2016 .
NOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Original trailer * " Hunt for the Wilderpeople at NZ on Screen