SHOOTER ( TV SERIES )
Shooter is an American television drama series based on the 2007 film of the same name and the novel Point of Impact by Stephen Hunter .
The show stars Ryan Phillippe in the lead role of Bob Lee Swagger , an expert marksman living in exile who is coaxed back into action after learning of a plot to kill the President .
USA Network picked up the pilot in August 2015 and ordered the pilot to series in February 2016 .
The series was originally set to premiere on July 19 , 2016 , but was postponed a week to July 26 , due to the July 7 Dallas shootings .
Following the Baton Rouge police officer shootings on July 17 , the series was pulled from USA 's summer schedule entirely .
On October 3 , 2016 , USA announced the new premiere date for Shooter would be November 15 , 2016 .
On December 19 , 2016 , the series was renewed for a second season that premiered on July 18 , 2017 .
On December 4 , 2017 , the series was renewed for a third season .
On August 15 , 2018 , USA Network canceled Shooter after three seasons , and its final episode aired on September 13 , 2018 .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN * Ryan Phillippe as Bob Lee Swagger , a highly trained Force Recon Marine and MARSOC CSO Scout Sniper
* Shantel VanSanten as Julie Swagger , Bob Lee 's wife * Cynthia Addai - Robinson as Nadine Memphis , an FBI agent investigating Swagger * Eddie McClintock as Jack Payne , a figure involved in the conspiracy against Swagger ( season 1 ; guest , season 3 ) * Omar Epps as Isaac Johnson , a Secret Service Agent who is also a former Force Recon Marine captain , MARSOC CSO , and commanding officer of Swagger * Josh Stewart as Solotov , a Chechen master sniper with whom Bob Lee has tangled before ( seasons 2–3 )
* Jesse Bradford as Harris Downey , a D.C. staffer who was once involved with Nadine ( recurring , season 2 ; main , season 3 ) * Gerald McRaney as Red Bama Sr . , owner of Bama Cattle and an Undersecretary in the Department of Agriculture ( season 3 )
RECURRING
* David Andrews as Sam Vincent , Bob Lee 's close friend and lawyer .
* David Marciano as Howard Utey ,
Nadine Memphis ' superior at the FBI ( season 1 )
* Lexy Kolker as Mary Swagger , Bob Lee 's and Julie 's daughter
* Tom Sizemore as Hugh Meachum , a CIA black ops operative with mysterious motives ( season 1 ) * Rob Brown as Donny Fenn , Swagger 's best friend and spotter who was killed by Solotov ( seasons 1–2 ) * Sean Cameron Michael as Grigory Krukov , a Russian FSB agent ( season 1 ) * Delaina Mitchell as Anna Wallingford , Julie 's married sister and Mary 's aunt
* Matt Shallenberger as John Wheeler , a mysterious and deadly Atlas operative ( seasons 1 , 3 ) * Desmond Harrington as Lon Scott , a CEO of Anhur Dynamics ( season 1 ) * Beverly D'Angelo as Patricia Gregson , a former National Security Advisor * Jerry Ferrara as Kirk Zehnder , a former marine who always detects a conspiracy and is part of the core team of Bob Lee Swagger ( season 2 )
* Todd Lowe as Colin Dobbs , a former marine in Swagger 's unit , now living in Texas an hour from the Swagger Ranch ( season 2 ) * Patrick Sabongui as Yusuf Ali , a core member of Swagger 's original Marine team ( season 2 ) * Jaina Lee Ortiz as Angela Tio , a Marine and part of Bob Lee 's former unit ( season 2 ) * John Marshall Jones as Sheriff Brown , the local law enforcement in Bob Lee 's hometown and a long - time friend ( season 2–3 )
* Harry Hamlin as Sen. Addison Hayes , a mysterious and powerful mastermind whose agenda will collide with Swagger ( seasons 2–3 )
* Troy Garity as Jeffrey Denning , a seasoned investigative journalist who cares deeply about justice being served ( season 2 )
* Derek Phillips as Earl Swagger , Bob Lee 's father , a Vietnam veteran who was sheriff in Bob Lee 's hometown before he was killed 30 years ago ( season 3 )
* Eric Ladin as Red Bama Jr. , Red Sr 's screw - up of a son who desperately wants his father 's respect and confidence ( season 3 )
* Felisha Terrell as Carlita Cruise , a former Atlas operative who is forced into working with Isaac and Nadine in order to preserve her own life ( season 3 ) PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On July 6 , 2016 , while filming a scene at Agua Dulce Airpark , actor Tom Sizemore accidentally ran over a stuntman .
Sizemore was supposed to enter the Cadillac Escalade and stay there until the scene ended , but the stunt coordinator told him to pull out , not realizing that the stuntman was behind him .
On July 26 , 2017 , the second - season episode order was cut back from the planned ten episodes to the eight episodes already filmed after Ryan Phillippe broke his leg on July 16 , 2017 , in an incident unrelated to the series .
EPISODES
SEASON 1
( 2016–17 ) SEASON 2 ( 2017 )
SEASON 3 ( 2018 )
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
Shooter aired on Thursdays at 10:00pm on USA Network .
The episodes are approximately 43 minutes , and are broadcast in both high- and standard definition .
In addition , the streaming service Netflix started to broadcast the series in certain regions worldwide , the first season weekly on November 15 , 2016 , with a one - day delay with respect to the original United States broadcast .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Shooter received mixed reviews from critics .
On the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the series has an approval rating of 44 % , based on 16 reviews , with an average rating of 5.9/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Ryan Phillippe 's efforts are n't enough to salvage Shooter , a tedious , under - developed drama that lacks an original voice or perspective . "
On Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating , the series has a score 60 out of 100 , based on 10 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
RATINGS
SEASON 1
( 2016–17 ) SEASON 2 ( 2017 )
SEASON 3 ( 2018 )
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Shooter on Netflix