TANGLED :
THE SERIES
Tangled :
The Series , known as Rapunzel 's Tangled Adventure in its second season , is an American animated television series developed by Chris Sonnenburg and Shane Pigmore and produced by Disney Television Animation that premiered on Disney Channel as a Disney Channel Original Movie titled on March 10 , 2017 , with regular episodes premiering on March 24 , 2017 .
The series is based on the 2010 film Tangled and features the returning voices of Zachary Levi and Mandy Moore , alongside Eden Espinosa , Clancy Brown , and Julie Bowen .
In February 2017 , ahead of the series premiere , the series was renewed for a second season , which premiered on June 24 , 2018 .
In May 2018 , ahead of the premiere of the series ' season 2 , it was announced that the series has been renewed for the third season .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Since being freed from Mother Gothel and reunited with her birth parents , King Frederic and Queen Arianna of Corona , Rapunzel adjusts to her life as their daughter and continues to have different misadventures with her boyfriend Eugene Fitzherbert , Pascal
the Chameleon , Maximus the Horse , and her new handmaiden Cassandra , to uncover the mystery of her new 70-foot blonde hair 's return .
The second season centers around Rapunzel , Eugene , and Cass 's journey - accompanied by Lance , Hook Foot , and Shorty- to solve the mystery of the black rock spikes and unveil Rapunzel 's connection to them .
They are also aided by the mysterious sword - wielding Adira who hails from " the Dark Kingdom " , from where the mystical rock spikes originated .
CHARACTERS MAIN * Eugene ( Zachary Levi ) , whose previous alias is Flynn Rider , is a reformed thief and Rapunzel 's boyfriend .
He has a mutual dislike and mistrust for Cassandra .
* Rapunzel ( Mandy Moore ) is the Princess of Corona .
She tries her best to become a good future queen , even though her naive ways get her into trouble .
* Cassandra ( Eden Espinosa ) is Rapunzel 's best friend and a lady - in - waiting who is the adopted daughter of the Captain of the Guards .
She has a strong dislike for Eugene and is also a trained warrior .
*
King Frederic ( Clancy Brown ) is the king of Corona and Rapunzel 's overprotective but loving father .
Since the night his only child was taken , he naturally fears and dislikes magic of any kind .
*
Queen Arianna ( Julie Bowen ) is the queen of Corona and Rapunzel 's mother .
She wants her daughter to follow her heart and do what she believes in .
As an early coronation present , she had given Rapunzel a journal to fill its pages with her own adventures .
RECURRING *
Pascal and Maximus
( Dee Bradley Baker )
* Pascal is a chameleon who is the pet and best friend of Rapunzel whose backstory is revealed in " " .
*
Maximus is a white stallion with the nose of a bloodhound .
He is originally owned by the Captain of the Guards and later by Eugene .
*
Fidella is Cassandra 's horse and Maximus 's love interest .
* Corona Royal Guards are servants of King Frederic .
* Captain ( M.C. Gainey ) is the leader of the Royal Guards and Cassandra 's father .
*
Pete ( Sean Hayes ) is a member of the Royal Guards .
* Stan ( Diedrich Bader ) is a member of the Royal Guards .
*
The Pub Thugs are a bunch of thugs that hang out at the Snuggly Duckling pub and were befriended by Rapunzel and Eugene .
* Hook Foot ( Jeff Ross ) is the hook - footed brother of Hook Hand .
Hook Foot takes the place of his brother who is on a world tour as a concert pianist .
Hook Foot joins Rapunzel and Eugene on their adventures in season 2 .
* Big Nose ( Jeffrey Tambor ) is a big - nosed thug that is the romantic of the thugs .
* Shorty ( Paul F. Tompkins ) is a short , old , and crazy thug .
Shorty joins Rapunzel and Eugene on their adventures in season 2 .
* Vladimir ( Charles Halford ) is a thug in a bull - horned helmet that is the strongest of the thugs .
He was previously voiced by Richard Kiel in the movie .
* Attila Buckethead ( Steven Blum ) is a thug in a full metal helmet whose passion is baking .
He becomes Monty 's assistant in " " .
He was previously voiced by Byron Howard in the movie .
*
Ulf is a thug who seeks to become a professional mime .
In accordance with his profession , he does not ever speak .
* Lady Caine ( Laura Benanti ) is the main antagonist of and the first half of the first season .
On Rapunzel 's coronation day she launches an attack alongside some thieves , in order to get revenge on King Fredric for taking her father away .
Rapunzel has no other choice and reveals her new 70-foot golden hair and , with the help of her friends , defeat all the thugs who get arrested .
She returns in " " where her horse Axel breaks her out without any suspicion as he intentionally became part of the royal guard .
However , Maximus has suspected Axel all along and stops the two .
* Uncle Monty ( Richard Kind ) is an elderly shopkeeper in Corona who has personal issues with Rapunzel .
* Nigel ( Peter MacNicol ) is King Frederic 's adviser .
* Xavier ( Adewale Akinnuoye - Agbaje ) is a blacksmith who appears to be well - versed with Corona 's history .
* Lance Strongbow ( James Monroe Iglehart ) is Eugene 's old childhood friend and former partner - in - crime from his younger thieving days .
His real name is revealed to be Arnwaldo Schnitz .
He first appeared in " " .
He joins Rapunzel and Eugene on their adventures in Season 2 .
* Varian ( Jeremy Jordan ) is a clumsy , but smart , young alchemist .
He tries to help Rapunzel discover the secrets of her newly regrown hair .
He later serves as the main antagonist for the second half of the first season .
When Rapunzel is unable to help him free his father from crystal encasement due to the winter storm threatening Corona , he seeks revenge on her and Corona .
After betraying Rapunzel and stealing the flower that helped giving birth to her , he discovers that the magic in the flower is gone , but now lives in Rapunzel .
So , he launches an attack on her 19th birthday and captures Queen Arianna to convince Rapunzel to come and help him release his father .
But , after Rapunzel accepts her connection with the black rocks , they destroy Varian 's army of automatons and he is arrested for his crimes against Corona .
As Varian is taken away , he swears once again to release his father and make him proud , even if it 's the last thing he ever does .
King Fredric promises Rapunzel that , one day , Varian will receive all the help he needs .
* Quirin ( Jonathan Banks ) is Varian 's disapproving father , currently encased in golden crystals as an offshoot of the mysterious stone spikes ravaging Corona .
He was originally from the dark kingdom and had severed under King Edmund , along with Adira , until he was commanded to leave as the sinister rock spikes and immeasurable power of the Opal made it uninhabitable .
*
Angry ( Vivian Vencer ) is an angry young thief and one of the twins Eugene and Lance convinced to change their ways in " Big Brothers of Corona " .
* Red ( Ruby Jay ) is a quiet young red - haired thief and the second of the twins from " Big Brothers of Corona " .
* Old Lady Crowley ( Pat Carroll ) is a grumpy old lady known to never smile .
Eugene calls her " Scowley Crowley " .
* Willow ( Jane Krakowski ) is Queen Ariana 's estranged younger sister who arrives unexpectedly on Ariana 's birthday .
As a birthday present , she gives Ariana a small creature with a green rattle that she must have at all times .
* Feldspar ( Zachary Levi ) is the local cobbler of Corona .
Levi does an impression of comedian Ed Wynn for the character .
SUPPORTING
* Mother Gothel ( Donna Murphy ) is the deceased adoptive mother of Rapunzel who abducted her as an infant due to her golden hair 's unique healing abilities , which she then hoarded for herself to maintain her youth and beauty .
She aged into dust at the end of the original movie .
She is first seen in one of Rapunzel 's nightmares shortly after her 70-foot golden hair mysteriously grew back and gained new mystical abilities .
Gothel claimed that she had " risen from the dead " and that it was time for Rapunzel to return to her tower where she would be " safe and secure . "
* The Stabbington Brothers ( Ron Perlman ) are the former partners - in - crime of Eugene , whom he betrayed in his thieving days as Flynn Rider .
They had worked with Mother Gothel to get Rapunzel back in order to get revenge but were captured by the royal guards soon after .
They first appeared in " " where they use the " game " created by Rapunzel to escape from their cell and capture Eugene and Cassandra .
However , as they are about to kill Eugene in revenge , he and Cass work together and defeated the two who were , most probably , locked up once again .
* Ruth ( Danielle Brooks ) is a bitter ghost who was able to pass on to the afterlife with Rapunzel and the Snuggly Duckling gang 's participation in one of her lost melodies .
*
The Baron ( Lance Henriksen ) is an enemy of Eugene 's and the antagonist of Beyond the Corona Walls .
He has a pet venomous Kai spider .
* Anthony ( Gideon Emery ) , nicknamed the " Weasel " , is a subordinate of the Baron .
* Stalyan ( Yvonne Strahovski ) is the Baron 's daughter and Eugene 's former girlfriend whom he left at the altar .
*
Adira ( Kelly Hu ) is a mysterious and fierce warrior who knows of Rapunzel 's quest .
Lance appears to have a crush on her .
Debuting in the end of the Season 1 finale as a cameo , she appears as a supporting character and mysterious ally throughout Season 2 .
* Vex ( Britt Robertson ) is a girl who demanded money for her services but changed her ways and became Quaid 's deputy after the latter defeated the Collector in his rematch .
*
Captain Quaid the Blade ( Reg E. Cathey ) is a sheriff of Vardaros who became a beekeeper after he met his match until he met Rapunzel and came out of retirement .
* Madame Canardist ( Carol Kane )
* Vigor the Visionary ( Dee Bradley Baker ) is a psychic chimp .
* Calliope ( Natalie Palamides ) is the Keeper of the spire 's apprentice .
* Kirlok EPISODES SERIES OVERVIEW FILM ( 2017 )
SEASON 1
( 2017–18 ) SEASON 2 ( 2018 )
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On June 3 , 2015 , Disney Channel announced that the series was in development .
On February 15 , 2017 , it was announced that the series had been renewed for a second season ahead of the series premiere .
The series features new songs from Alan Menken , who wrote and scored the songs for the original movie , and Glenn Slater .
On May 31 , 2018 , it was announced that the second season would premiere on June 24 , 2018 , and that the series had also been renewed for a third season .
Additionally , it was also announced that the series would be re - titled as Rapunzel 's Tangled Adventure .
RELEASE
TANGLED :
SHORT CUTS ( 2017 ) Section::::Release .
Section::::Tangled : Short Cuts ( 2017 ) .
Four mini - episodes were released weekly in May 2017 : " Check Mate " on May 5 , " Prison Bake " on May 12 , " Make Me Smile " on May 19 , and " Hare Peace " on May 26 .
A fifth , " Night Bite , " was released on Disney Channel 's YouTube channel on June 25 , 2018 .
A sixth , " Hiccup Fever " , was released on July 7 , 2018 .
A seventh , " Snowball " , was released on August 4 , 2018 .
An eighth , " Hairdon't " , was released on August 20 , 2018 .
A ninth , " Unicorn - y " , was released on August 23 , 2018 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Tangled : Before Ever After and the four Tangled : Short Cuts were released on DVD on April 11 , 2017 .
Tangled : The Series – Queen for a Day was released on DVD on December 12 , 2017 .
RATINGS AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Nominee !
Result !
Ref . !
align="center " ! align="center " ! align="center " ! align="center " ! align="center " ! align="center " REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS