RICE ALLERGY Rice allergy is a type of food allergy .
People allergic to rice react to some rice proteins after they eat rice or breathe in rice steam .
Although some reactions might lead to severe health problems , doctors can diagnose rice allergy with many methods and help allergic people to avoid reactions .
SYMPTOMS Section::::Symptoms .
Some rice proteins are regarded as the causes of allergy in people .
People allergic to rice might have sneezing , runny nose , itching , asthma , stomachache or eczema after they eat rice .
Besides eating rice , people with a rice allergy can have reactions breathing rice steam from cooked rice .
Allergic people might have skin rashes and swellings .
Moreover , they might stop breathing and die due to their stopped heart .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
People suspected of having a rice allergy can try diet avoidance on their own .
First , they have to avoid rice for a couple of weeks .
If they do n't have symptoms in the avoidance period but have those when exposed to rice , they are most likely allergic to rice .
Specific rice IgE , a kind of antibody in human blood , will rise significantly when people are allergic to rice .
A blood test shows the level of the antibody .
Skin prick test , the most efficient diagnosis , shows the reactions in a short period .
After being pricked in their skin with some rice mixture , allergic people will get itching and swelling in about 30 minutes .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
Some symptoms might weaken if people get allergy shots .
After getting several treatments for a long time , some allergic people will not have reactions afterwards .
Some reactions have been eased by replacing original rice with genetically modified rice .
This is regarded as a new choice for rice allergic people .
Reactions might lessen by staying away from rice long - term .
PREVALENCE Section::::Prevalence .
Unlike other food allergies , rice allergy is relatively uncommon .
It has been reported worldwide but mostly in China , Japan or Korea .
Because rice is a major food in Asia , people from Asia are exposed to higher allergy risk than people from other areas .
REFERENCES