EVERYTHING , EVERYTHING ( NOVEL )
Everything , Everything is the debut young adult novel by Jamaican - American author Nicola Yoon , first published by Delacorte Books for Young Readers in 2015 .
The novel centers around 17-year - old Madeline Whittier , who is being treated for severe combined immunodeficiency ( SCID ) , also known as " bubble baby disease " .
Due to this , Madeline is kept inside her house in Los Angeles , where she lives with her mother , a doctor .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The story follows 18-year - old Madeline " Maddy " Whittier , who is being treated by her mother for severe combined immunodeficiency ( SCID ) , and therefore is not allowed to leave her house or interact with anything that has not been " sanitized " .
Her world consists of her mother Pauline , her nurse Carla , and the books she immerses herself in ; with her father and brother having died a long time ago .
A family moves in next door and Maddy watches them from the window .
Olly , the son , befriends her and the two begin to message each other online .
She also notices that Olly 's father is abusive and that his sister has a smoking problem .
One day , Carla sneaks Olly into Maddy 's house , and the two meet face to face for the first time .
They begin meeting in Maddy 's house regularly , and at one point Maddy even goes outside for a few seconds .
When her mother discovers Maddy has been secretly meeting Olly , she fires Carla and bans Maddy from ever seeing Olly again , but they continue secretly texting .
Olly and Maddy decide to go to Hawaii together , which is the only place Maddy remembers she had a " normal family " vacation with her father , brother , and mother .
However , Olly only agrees to go after Maddy because of Maddy 's lies , she tells him that she is on a new medicine that will keep her from getting sick .
The two go to Hawaii , explore the country and just be blissful for a day .
The next day , Maddy has to be taken to a hospital because she begins to feel extremely sick .
Luckily , Maddy 's mother was already on her way to Hawaii and brings her home .
Maddy stops emailing Olly as she does n't want to miss the outside world .
A month later Maddy sees Olly , his sister , and his mother , all loading their belongings into a moving van while their father is at work , escaping his tyranny .
Two months after Hawaii , Maddy gets a letter from the doctor who treated her after she got sick , and in the note , the doctor says that Maddy does not have SCID , and she got sick because she had spent her whole life inside and has never formed a natural immunity .
The doctor blames myocarditis as the reason for Maddy 's heart - stopping .
Maddy , angry and panicked , searches her mother 's medical files but does not find the test results or doctor 's notes that would confirm she had SCID .
Instead , she finds some notes her mother wrote and a few articles about SCID from the internet .
She confronts her mother , who breaks down and indirectly admits she does not have SCID .
Maddy tells Carla , and Carla says she always suspected that .
Maddy 's mother reveals that right after Maddy 's father ( a police officer ) and her brother died , Maddy got very sick , and her mother , not wanting to lose her , decided she had SCID , and needed to be kept away from the world .
In the end , Maddy and Olly happily reunite in New York , where she sent him on a mini scavenger hunt that led him to a used bookstore .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
A reviewer for The Guardian wrote about the book : " The way the author describes Madeline 's world using such beautiful imagery makes the reader appreciate the little things in life " .
FILM ADAPTATION Section::::Film adaptation .
The novel was adapted into a feature film .
In July 2016 , it was announced that Amandla Stenberg would play Madeline Whittier and Nick Robinson would play opposite Stenberg as Olly .
Stella Meghie directed the film , and J. Mills Goodloe wrote the script .
In February 2017 , Warner Bros. debuted the trailer .
The film was released on May 19 , 2017 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Library holdings of Everything , Everything at WorldCat