THANK YOU FOR YOUR SERVICE ( 2017 FILM )
Thank You for Your Service is a 2017 American biographical war drama film written and directed by Jason Hall , in his directorial debut , based on the 2013 non - fiction book of the same name by David Finkel .
Finkel , a Washington Post reporter , wrote about veterans of the 2nd Battalion , 16th Infantry Regiment returning to the vicinity of Fort Riley , Kansas , following a 15-month deployment in Iraq in 2007 .
The film is about posttraumatic stress disorder ( PTSD ) , depicting U.S. soldiers who try to adjust to civilian life , and stars Miles Teller , Haley Bennett , Beulah Koale , Amy Schumer and Scott Haze .
A new Bruce Springsteen song , " Freedom Cadence " , was written specifically for the closing credits .
The film had its world premiere at the Heartland Film Festival on October 15 , 2017 , and was released in the United States on October 27 , 2017 , by Universal Pictures .
It received generally positive reviews from critics , with praise aimed at the performances ( particularly that of Teller , Bennett , and Koale ) , but grossed just $ 9 million against its $ 20 million budget .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
After a harrowing 15-month combat experience in Iraq , the much - decorated Adam Schumann ( Miles Teller ) returns home to Kansas and a loving wife , Saskia ( Haley Bennett ) .
Adam and Saskia have two young children , a daughter and an infant son born while Adam was still overseas .
Adam suffers from PTSD as manifest by nightmares and frequent flashbacks for which his wife convinces him to seek help from an overburdened Department of Veterans Affairs .
He also receives solace from two Iraq buddies living nearby , an American Samoan , Solo Aeiti ( Beulah Koale ) , and Billy Waller ( Joe Cole ) , who commits suicide in front of his fiancée ( Erin Darke ) after discovering she has taken all his money and their child and left him .
Adam 's unresolved psychological issues revolve around his failure to safely rescue a fellow soldier from a building under fire , Michael Emory ( Scott Haze ) , who was dropped on his head and rendered hemiplegic but later expresses gratitude to Adam for being alive , and survivor 's guilt about letting Sergeant First Class James Doster ( Brad Beyer ) take Adam 's place on patrol one day .
When the Humvee with Doster filling in for Adam makes a wrong turn and hits an improvised explosive device , Solo assists the men in their escape to safety , but Doster is inadvertently left behind and dies in the conflagration .
Doster 's grieving widow , Amanda ( Amy Schumer ) , who is best of friends with Saskia Schumann , finally gains closure as she learns the circumstances of her husband 's death towards the end of the movie and absolves Adam and Solo of responsibility for it .
Meanwhile , Solo suffers from such severe PTSD and memory loss that he is unable to fulfill a fervent desire to reenlist for another tour in Iraq
He falls in with a group of drug dealers led by a Gulf War veteran , Dante ( Omar Dorsey ) .
Adam rescues his friend and puts him on a Greyhound bus to California , where Solo will take Adam 's place at a rehabilitation center specializing in the treatment of PTSD .
Sometime later , Adam returns from his own stay at the rehabilitation center , being greeted by his wife and children back in their original home .
CAST * Miles Teller as Staff Sergeant Adam Schumann , Saskia 's husband , a soldier who leaves Iraq as a broken man .
* Haley Bennett as Saskia Schumann , Adam 's loyal and supportive wife .
* Beulah Koale as Specialist Tausolo Aieti , Alea 's husband , an American Samoan soldier who feels that the military has made his life better .
* Joe Cole as Billy Waller , a soldier who returns home in crisis and tries to find his fiancée and their daughter who have left him .
*
Amy Schumer as Amanda Doster , Saskia 's best friend and the wife of Sergeant First Class James Doster .
* Brad Beyer as Sergeant First Class James Doster , Amanda 's husband .
* Keisha Castle - Hughes as Alea , Tausolo Aieti 's wife * Scott Haze as Michael Adam Emory , a soldier suffering from PTSD .
* Omar Dorsey as Dante , a veteran who now operates as a drug smuggler * Jayson Warner Smith as VA Receptionist * Sean P Mcgoldrick as Private Chris Kyle Jr. * Erin Darke as Tracey
* David Morse as Fred Gusman
* Jake Weber as Colonel Plymouth
* Kate Lyn Sheil as Bell PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On March 12 , 2013 , DreamWorks announced that it had acquired the film rights to the David Finkel 's upcoming non - fiction book
Thank You for Your Service , about posttraumatic stress disorder ( PTSD ) in soldiers who return from war in Iraq and have difficulties in adapting to civilian life .
Steven Spielberg was expected to join the film as director , while American Snipers Oscar - nominated scribe Jason Dean Hall was hired in June 2013 to adapt the book into a film .
Daniel Day - Lewis was later eyed to re - team with Spielberg on this film .
On June 30 , 2015 , The Hollywood Reporter confirmed that screenwriter Hall would be making his directorial debut with the film from his own script .
On August 19 , 2015 , it was reported that Miles Teller was in talks to join the film as Adam Schumann , a soldier who leaves Iraq as a broken man .
On October 20 , 2015 , Haley Bennett was cast in the film to play Schumann 's loyal and supportive wife .
On December 2 , 2015 , New Zealand - based newcomer Beulah Koale joined the film to play Solo , an American Samoan soldier who feels that the military had made his life better .
On January 7 , 2016 , Scott Haze was cast in the film to play a soldier suffering from PTSD .
Jon Kilik would produce the film , which Universal Pictures would distribute in the United States .
On January 28 , 2016 , Joe Cole joined the film to play a soldier who returns home in crisis and tries to find his fiancée and their daughter who have left him , while Jayson Warner Smith joined the film to play a receptionist at a Veterans Affairs office .
On February 9 , 2016 , Amy Schumer joined the cast with three others : Keisha Castle - Hughes , Brad Beyer , and Omar Dorsey .
It was later revealed that Kate Lyn Sheil had joined the cast .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography on the film began on February 9 , 2016 , in Atlanta , Georgia .
In March 2016 , it filmed at the Gwinnett Place Mall in Duluth , Georgia .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film had its world premiere at the Heartland Film Festival on October 15 , 2017 .
The film was released in the United States on October 27 , 2017 .
PROMOTION Section::::Promotion .
On October 20 , 2017 , Universal and DreamWorks announced a partnership with Chinese - owned AMC Theatres to give more than 10,000 free tickets to the film to veterans and service members .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
In the United States and Canada , Thank You for Your Service was released alongside Jigsaw and Suburbicon , and was projected to gross around $ 5 million from 2,054 theaters in its opening weekend .
It ended up debuting to just $ 3.7 million , finishing 6th at the box office , and marking the second straight week Teller was featured in a well - received but underperforming biopic , following Only the Brave .
In its second weekend it made $ 2.3 million , dropping 40 % , finishing 7th at the box office .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 77 % based on 100 reviews , with an average rating of 6.7/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Thank You for Your Service takes a sobering and powerfully acted –
if necessarily incomplete – look at soldiers grappling with the horrific emotional impact of war . "
On Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating to reviews , the film has a weighted average score of 68 out of 100 , based on 34 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A – " on an A+ to F scale .
Matt Zoller Seitz of RogerEbert.com gave the film 3.5/4 stars , stating that the film , although a studio picture , " has been written , shot , edited and acted in such an intimate and unobtrusive way that the result feels like a throwback to an earlier era of American mainstream filmmaking , when it was still possible to base a handsomely produced feature film around observed behavior . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS