HAVE
I BEEN PWNED ?
Have I Been Pwned ?
( HIBP ) is a website that allows internet users to check if their personal data has been compromised by data breaches .
The service collects and analyzes hundreds of database dumps and pastes containing information about billions of leaked accounts , and allows users to search for their own information by entering their username or email address .
Users can also sign up to be notified if their email address appears in future dumps .
The site has been widely touted as a valuable resource for internet users wishing to protect their own security and privacy .
Have I Been Pwned ?
was created by security expert Troy Hunt on 4 December 2013 .
As of November 2017 , Have I Been Pwned ?
receives around sixty thousand daily visitors , the site has over 1.7 million active email subscribers and contains records of over 4.8 billion accounts from over 251 data breaches .
FEATURES Section::::Features .
The primary function of Have I Been Pwned ?
since it was launched is to provide the general public a means to check if their private information has been leaked or compromised .
Visitors to the website can enter an email address , and see a list of all known data breaches with records tied to that email address .
The website also provides details about each data breach , such as the backstory of the breach and what specific types of data were included in it .
Have I Been Pwned ?
also offers a " Notify me " service that allows visitors to subscribe to notifications about future breaches .
Once someone signs up with this notification mailing service , they will receive an email message any time their personal information is found in a new data breach .
In September 2014 , Hunt added functionality that enabled new data breaches to be automatically added to HIBP 's database .
The new feature used Dump Monitor , a Twitter bot which detects and broadcasts likely password dumps found on pastebin pastes , to automatically add new potential breaches in real - time .
Data breaches often show up on pastebins before they are widely reported on ; thus , monitoring this source allows consumers to be notified sooner if they 've been compromised .
Along with detailing which data breach events the email account has been affected by , the website also points those who appear in their database search to install a password manager , namely : 1Password , which Troy Hunt has recently endorsed .
An online explanation on his website explains his motives and maintains that monetary gain is not the goal of this partnership .
PWNED PASSWORDS
Section::::Pwned passwords .
In August 2017 , Hunt made public 306 million passwords which could be accessed via a web search or downloadable in bulk .
In February 2018 British computer scientist , Junade Ali , created a communication protocol ( using K - Anonymity and cryptographic hashing ) to anonymously verify if a password was leaked without fully disclosing the searched password .
This protocol was implemented as a public API in Hunt 's service and is now consumed by multiple websites and services including password managers and browser extensions .
HISTORY LAUNCH Section::::History .
Section::::Launch .
In late 2013 , web security expert Troy Hunt was analyzing data breaches for trends and patterns .
He realized breaches could greatly impact users who might not even be aware their data was compromised , and as a result , began developing HIBP . "
Probably the main catalyst was Adobe , " said Hunt of his motivation for starting the site , referring to the Adobe Systems security breach that affected 153 million accounts in October 2013 .
Hunt launched Have I Been Pwned ?
on 4 December 2013 with an announcement on his blog .
At this time , the site had just five data breaches indexed : Adobe Systems , Stratfor , Gawker , Yahoo !
Voices , and Sony Pictures .
However , the site now had the functionality to easily add future breaches as soon as they were made public : DATA BREACHES Section::::Data breaches .
Since its launch , the primary development focus of HIBP has been to add new data breaches as quickly as possible after they are leaked to the public .
In July 2015 , online dating service Ashley Madison , known for encouraging users to have an extramarital affair , suffered a data breach , and the identities of more than 30 million users of the service were leaked to the public .
The data breach received wide media coverage , presumably due to the large number of impacted users and the perceived shame of having an affair .
According to Hunt , the breach 's publicity resulted in a 57,000 % increase in traffic to HIBP .
Following this breach , Hunt added functionality to HIBP by which breaches considered " sensitive " would not be publicly searchable , and would only be revealed to subscribers of the email notification system .
This functionality was enabled for the Ashley Madison data , as well as for data from other potentially scandalous sites , such as Adult FriendFinder .
In October 2015 , Hunt was contacted by an anonymous source who provided him with a dump of 13.5 million users ' email addresses and plaintext passwords , claiming it came from 000webhost , a free web hosting provider .
Working with Thomas Fox - Brewster of Forbes , he verified that the dump was most likely legitimate by testing email addresses from it and by confirming sensitive information with several 000webhost customers .
Hunt and Fox - Brewster attempted many times to contact 000webhost to further confirm the authenticity of the breach , but were unable to get a response .
On 29 October 2015 , following a reset of all passwords and the publication of Fox - Brewster 's article about the breach , 000webhost announced the data breach via their Facebook page .
In early November 2015 , two breaches of gambling payment providers Neteller and Skrill were confirmed to be legitimate by the Paysafe Group , the parent company of both providers .
The data included 3.6 million records from Neteller obtained in 2009 using an exploit in Joomla , and 4.2 million records from Skrill ( then known as Moneybookers ) that leaked in 2010 after a virtual private network was compromised .
The combined 7.8 million records were added to HIBP 's database .
Later that month , electronic toy maker VTech was hacked , and an anonymous source privately provided a database containing nearly five million parents ' records to HIBP .
According to Hunt , this was the fourth largest consumer privacy breach to date .
In May 2016 , an unprecedented series of very large data breaches that dated back several years were all released in a short timespan .
These breaches included 360 million Myspace accounts from circa 2009 , 164 million LinkedIn accounts from 2012 , 65 million Tumblr accounts from early 2013 , and 40 million accounts from adult dating service Fling.com .
These datasets were all put up for sale by an anonymous hacker named " peace_of_mind " , and were shortly thereafter provided to Hunt to be included in HIBP .
In June 2016 , an additional " mega breach " of 171 million accounts from Russian social network VK was added to HIBP 's database .
In August 2017 , BBC News featured Have I Been Pwned ?
on Hunt 's discovery of a spamming operation that has been drawing on a list of 711.5 million email addresses .
BRANDING
Section::::Branding .
The name " Have I Been Pwned ? " is based on the script kiddie jargon term " pwn " , which means " to compromise or take control , specifically of another computer or application . "
HIBP 's logo includes the text codice_1 , which is a common SQL injection attack string .
A hacker trying to take control of a website 's database might use such an attack string to manipulate a website into running malicious code .
Injection attacks are one of the most common vectors by which a database breach can occur ; they are the # 1 most common web application vulnerability on the OWASP Top 10 list .
SEE ALSO
* Database security
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Have I Been Pwned ?
announcement blog post on troyhunt.com