GARNET ( STEVEN UNIVERSE )
Garnet is a fictional character from the animated series Steven Universe , created by Rebecca Sugar .
She is a " gem " , a fictional alien being that exists as a magical gemstone projecting a holographic body .
Garnet is a " fusion gem " — i.e. , two gemstones combining personalities and appearances as one shared holographic body — formed by two Gems named Ruby and Sapphire ; they chose to remain permanently fused out of love for each other .
Garnet is voiced by Estelle , a performance that has seen a positive reception .
Garnet is frequently praised for being a depiction of a positive lesbian relationship .
CHARACTER Section::::Character .
The de - facto leader of the Crystal Gems , the group of Gems that protect humanity and the Earth from danger , in the absence of Steven 's mother Rose Quartz , Garnet is initially presented as stoic and unfeeling but pragmatic and capable .
The show 's writers have described Garnet as characterized by great self - confidence ; they represent this in their writing of the character through the fact that she never asks questions .
Eric Thurm of The A.V. Club described Garnet as " initially the most reticent , distant , and simply alien " of the Crystal Gems .
Garnet took on the role of this group 's de facto leader , appearing relatively distant as she rarely speaks out .
As the story of Steven Universe progresses , however , she becomes more relatable .
Writing for Minnesota Daily , Cecilia Mazumdar Stanger pointed out that Garnet is far from a perfect leader and can make mistakes .
Garnet can use a skill called " future vision " , which allows her to view different possible outcomes in order to effectively predict future events accurately .
Eric Thurm noted that scenes in which Garnet uses her future vision are among the show 's best visual accomplishments .
Garnet also appears on OK K.O. !
Let 's Be Heroes during its crossover episode " Crossover Nexus " , explaining during the episode 's storyline that her sunglasses help her channel her future vision .
RUBY AND SAPPHIRE Section::::Ruby and Sapphire .
According to Sugar , Garnet was intended to be a fusion since the pilot episode , though the characters of Ruby and Sapphire came into focus while Sugar was writing for Garnet .
Sugar described the process as " reverse engineering " the two personalities based on what the production team brought to the show .
The first time viewers learn that Garnet is a fusion is the finale of the first season , " Jail Break " , but hints and foreshadowing in earlier episodes had led many viewers to suspect it earlier .
Neither Ruby nor Sapphire is given real character depth in " Jail Break " , but their presence shows how Garnet 's two parts blend into one character .
Ruby is characterized as a feisty and aggressive fighter , while Sapphire is a stoic and contemplative oracle , resulting in a complex dynamic when Garnet is fused together .
Garnet 's stable relationship while fused is used as a metaphor in the series , as Ruby and Sapphire together are stronger than any one Gem on their own .
Garnet is described as being made of " literal love , the romantic love of two queer individuals , " as all Gems , including Ruby and Sapphire , present in a feminine manner .
The second - season episode " The Answer " features a flashback of Ruby and Sapphire 's first meeting : Sapphire was a member of Blue Diamond 's court who came to Earth to assist in the capture of Rose Quartz , and Ruby was one of her bodyguards .
Ruby and Sapphire accidentally fuse for the first time when Ruby pushes her out of the way of danger , and they flee to escape execution for the taboo of mixed - Gem fusion .
Garnet joins the Crystal Gems after encountering Rose Quartz , who tells her that Ruby and Sapphire 's love is " the answer " to all her questions .
A later episode , " Now We 're Only Falling Apart " , reveals how Garnet 's creation influenced Rose Quartz 's ideals to fight for the fusion 's right to exist .
In a story arc at the end of the fifth season , Garnet unfuses when Sapphire feels betrayed by Rose , who had encouraged their fusion in the first place , and parts ways with Ruby , saying that their relationship is based on a lie .
As Sapphire learns Rose 's full story from Pearl , Ruby realizes she has never spent any time exploring her own identity apart from Sapphire , and leaves to embark on a quest of self - discovery .
Eventually the two both realize that they still want to be together , and in the episode " Reunited "
, they are married as their way of being together on their own terms , rather than just because of Rose Quartz .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Garnet is voiced by Estelle in the original dub of Steven Universe .
Estelle 's vocal performance is commonly praised by critics : Vrai Kaiser of The Mary Sue commended Estelle 's voice work in " Jail Break " by stating that " the amount of love , layers , and history she packs into so few words goes right to the heart no matter how many times you watch it . "
Garnet 's narration in " The Answer " was praised by Eric Thurn because Estelle got the opportunity to do voice work that was more fun and " soft " .
AJ Adejare of The Fandom Post criticized the voice director of Steven Universe for under - utilizing Estelle 's talents , as Garnet is mostly silent in the show .
Garnet is Estelle 's first voice - over role , and the character was designed by Rebecca Sugar while she was listening to Estelle 's music .
Garnet has commonly been praised as a depiction of a romantic lesbian relationship in an animated series .
Since 2010 , animated television series such as Adventure Time and The Legend of Korra have shown a larger amount of LGBT representation .
Steven Universe makes frequent use of LGBT - related themes : Pearl has strong romantic feelings to Rose Quartz , and Stevonnie is a genderqueer character .
Writing for The Lawrentian in January 2016 , Bridget Keenan described Garnet as " first canon lesbian couple on Cartoon Network " .
However , Keenan also criticized Garnet for portraying as healthy a relationship that would realistically be " unhealthy , unstable and controlling , " as Ruby and Sapphire seemed completely controlled by the relationship .
CENSORSHIP Section::::Censorship .
Some of the romantic interactions between Ruby and Sapphire have been censored during localization to other countries .
In the Swedish translation of Steven Universe episode " Hit the Diamond " , flirting between the two Gem characters was replaced with more neutral dialogue , causing controversy in Sweden , some fans of the series demanding that Cartoon Network Sweden not censor Ruby and Sapphire 's relationship again .
SEE ALSO
* " Jail Break " *
" The Answer " *
" The Question "
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Garnet on IMDb