THE SHAPE OF WATER
The Shape of Water is a 2017 American romantic dark fantasy drama film directed by Guillermo del Toro and written by del Toro and Vanessa Taylor .
It stars Sally Hawkins , Michael Shannon , Richard Jenkins , Doug Jones , Michael Stuhlbarg , and Octavia Spencer .
Set in Baltimore , Maryland , in 1962 , the story follows a mute custodian at a high - security government laboratory who falls in love with a captured humanoid amphibian creature .
Filming took place in Ontario , Canada , between August and November 2016 .
The film was screened in the main competition section of the 74th Venice International Film Festival , where it premiered on August 31 , 2017 , and was awarded the Golden Lion for best film .
It was also screened at the 2017 Toronto International Film Festival .
It began a limited release in two theaters in New York City on December 1 , 2017 , before expanding wide on December 23 , 2017 , and grossed $ 195 million worldwide .
The Shape of Water received critical acclaim for its acting , screenplay , direction , visuals , production design , and musical score , with many critics calling the film
del Toro 's best work since Pan 's Labyrinth ; the American Film Institute selected it as one of the top 10 films of the year .
The Shape of Water received a number of awards and nominations , including thirteen nominations at the 90th Academy Awards , where it won for Best Picture , Best Director , Best Production Design , and Best Original Score .
It was nominated for seven awards at the 75th Golden Globe Awards , winning for Best Director and Best Original Score , twelve at the 71st British Academy Film Awards , winning three awards , including Best Director and fourteen nominations at the 23rd Critics ' Choice Awards and won four awards .
A novelization by del Toro and Daniel Kraus was published on March 6 , 2018 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Elisa Esposito ( Sally Hawkins ) , who was found abandoned as a child by the side of a river with wounds on her neck , is mute and communicates through sign language .
She lives alone in an apartment above a cinema and works as a cleaner at a secret government laboratory in Baltimore , Maryland , at the height of the Cold War .
Her only friends are her closeted next - door neighbor Giles ( Richard Jenkins ) , a middle - aged struggling advertising illustrator , and Zelda ( Octavia Spencer ) , a co - worker who serves as her interpreter .
The facility receives a mysterious creature captured from the Amazon River by Colonel Richard Strickland ( Michael Shannon ) who is in charge of the project to study it .
Believing it is just a wild beast , Strickland treats it brutally , repeatedly shocking it with his electric cattle prod .
Curious about the creature , Elisa discovers it is a male humanoid amphibian ( Doug Jones ) .
She begins visiting him in secret and the two form a close bond as she teaches him sign language .
Seeking to exploit the Amphibian Man for an American advantage in the space race , General Frank Hoyt ( Nick Searcy ) is eventually persuaded by Strickland to vivisect it .
One scientist , Robert Hoffstetler ( Michael Stuhlbarg ) - who is really a Soviet spy named Dimitri Mosenkov - pleads unsuccessfully to keep the Amphibian Man alive for further study and , at the same time , is ordered by his Soviet handlers to euthanize the creature .
When Elisa overhears the American plans for the Amphibian Man , she persuades Giles to help her free him .
Hoffstetler stumbles upon Elisa 's plot in progress and chooses to help her .
Though initially reluctant , Zelda also becomes involved in the successful escape .
Elisa keeps the Amphibian Man in her bathtub .
She plans to release him into a nearby canal when it rains to give access to the ocean in several days ' time .
Strickland interrogates Elisa and Zelda , among others , but learns nothing .
Back at the apartment , Giles discovers the Amphibian Man devouring one of his cats .
Startled , the Amphibian Man slashes Giles 's arm and rushes out of the apartment .
He gets as far as the cinema downstairs , luckily empty of patrons , before Elisa finds him and returns him to her apartment .
He touches Giles on his balding head and his wounded arm , and the next morning Giles discovers his hair has begun growing back and the wounds on his arm have healed .
After initially walking away , Elisa has sex with the Amphibian Man in her shower .
For a later encounter , she fills the bathroom completely with water , which eventually begins to cause water to drip into the theater below .
The upset theater owner alerts Giles , who then enters the apartment and opens the bathroom door , interrupting the tryst .
Hoyt unexpectedly arrives and asks for the status of the case .
When Strickland questions how much experimentation is enough , he is told he has 36 hours to recover the Amphibian Man or his career and life will be over .
Meanwhile , Hoffstetler is told he will be extracted in two days .
As the planned release date approaches , the Amphibian Man 's health starts deteriorating .
Hoffstetler goes to meet his handlers with Strickland tailing him .
At the rendezvous , Hoffstetler is shot by a handler before Strickland kills him and then continuously tortures Hoffstetler for information ( knowing he is a spy by virtue of having heard him speak Russian to his handler ) while asking for the name and rank of who has the creature .
Before dying , Hoffstetler implicates Elisa and Zelda .
Strickland savagely threatens Zelda in her home until her husband Brewster ( Martin Roach ) reveals that Elisa has the Amphibian Man ( having overheard her conversations ) .
After Strickland 's departure , Zelda immediately calls Elisa , warning her to get the creature out immediately .
An enraged Strickland arrives and searches Elisa 's empty apartment until he finds a calendar note revealing where she plans to release the Amphibian Man .
At the canal , Elisa and Giles are bidding farewell to the creature when Strickland arrives , knocks Giles down , and shoots the Amphibian Man and Elisa .
The Amphibian Man quickly heals himself and slashes Strickland 's throat , killing him .
As police arrive on the scene with Zelda , the Amphibian Man takes Elisa and jumps into the canal , where he heals her .
When he applies his healing touch to the scars on Elisa 's neck , they open to reveal gills like his ; she jolts back to life , and the two embrace .
In a closing voice - over narration , Giles conveys his belief that Elisa lived " happily ever after in love " with the Amphibian Man .
CAST PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The idea for The Shape of Water formed during del Toro 's breakfast with Daniel Kraus in 2011 , with whom he later co - wrote the novel Trollhunters .
It shows similarities to the 2015 short film The Space Between Us .
It was also primarily inspired by del Toro 's childhood memories of seeing Creature from the Black Lagoon and wanting to see the Gill - man and Kay Lawrence ( played by Julie Adams ) succeed in their romance .
When del Toro was in talks with Universal to direct a remake of Creature from the Black Lagoon , he tried pitching a version focused more on the creature 's perspective , where the Creature ended up together with the female lead , but the studio executives rejected the concept .
Del Toro set the film during the 1960s Cold War era to counteract today 's heightened tensions , specifying , " if I say once upon a time in 1962 , it becomes a fairy tale for troubled times .
People can lower their guard a little bit more and listen to the story and listen to the characters and talk about the issues , rather than the circumstances of the issues . "
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
A fan of her performances in Happy - Go - Lucky and Fingersmith
, Del Toro wrote the script with Sally Hawkins in mind for the part and pitched the idea to her while intoxicated at the 2014 Golden Globes .
Hawkins prepared for the role by watching films of silent comedians Charlie Chaplin , Buster Keaton , Harold Lloyd and was told by Del Toro to watch Stan Laurel from Laurel and Hardy , whom Del Toro thought was capable of doing a " state of grace without conveying it verbally " .
The part of Giles was originally written with Ian McKellen in mind and Del Toro was inspired to do so by his performance as the real - life closeted gay filmmaker James Whale who directed Frankenstein , The Invisible Man and Bride of Frankenstein , who found himself unemployable in his later years .
When McKellen proved unavailable , Del Toro sent an e - mail to Richard Jenkins , who accepted the part .
Michael Shannon was cast as Richard Strickland , the villain of the film .
According to an interview with Vanity Fair , Shannon and Del Toro had early conversations about the notion that Strickland would have been the hero of the film if it had been made in the 1950s , something that fascinated the actor .
Octavia Spencer , who played the role of Elisa 's co - worker , friend and interpreter Zelda found it funny that the people Del Toro used to speak for the mute main character
were people who represent very disenfranchised groups .
PRINCIPAL PHOTOGRAPHY Section::::Principal photography .
Filming began on August 15 , 2016 , in Toronto and Hamilton , Ontario , and wrapped on November 6 , 2016 .
In an interview with IndieWire about the film , del Toro said , " This movie is a healing movie for me . ...
For nine movies I rephrased the fears of my childhood , the dreams of my childhood , and this is the first time I speak as an adult , about something that worries me as an adult .
I speak about trust , otherness , sex , love , where we 're going .
These are not concerns that I had when I was nine or seven . "
VISUALS Section::::Visuals .
According to an interview with The Wrap , Guillermo Del Toro was torn between making the film in color or in black and white , and was at one point leaning toward the latter .
Fox Searchlight Pictures offered Del Toro either a $ 20 million budget to make the film in color or a $ 17 million budget to shoot it in black and white .
"
That was honestly a battle I was expecting to lose , " Del Toro said to The Wrap .
" I was of two minds .
On one hand I thought black and white would look luscious , but on the other hand I thought it would look postmodern , like I was being reflective rather than immersed .
It 's good , because it got me three million more . "
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
Alexandre Desplat is the composer of the film 's score .
The score won the Academy Award for Best Original Score at the 90th Academy Awards .
TRACK LISTING
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The Shape of Water premiered on August 31 , 2017 at the 74th Venice International Film Festival .
It also screened at Telluride Film Festival , the 2017 Toronto International Film Festival and BFI London Film Festival , among others .
The film was released in two theaters in New York City on December 1 , 2017 and then expanded to several other cities the following week .
It had its official wide release in the United States on December 22 , 2017 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
On March 13 , 2018 , the film was released on Blu - ray , DVD and digital download .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The Shape of Water grossed $ 63.9 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 131.4 million in other countries , for a total of $ 195.2 million .
After grossing $ 4.6 million over three weeks of limited release , the film began its wide release on December 22 , 2017 , alongside the openings of Downsizing , Pitch Perfect 3 and Father Figures , and the wide expansion of Darkest Hour , and grossed $ 3 million from 726 theaters over the weekend , and $ 4.4 million over the four - day Christmas frame .
The following weekend , the film made $ 3.5 million .
The weekend of January 27 , 2018 , following the announcement of the film 's 13 Oscar nominations , the film was added to over 1,000 theaters ( for a total of 1,854 ) and made $ 5.9 million ( an increase of 171 % over the previous week 's $ 2.2 million ) , finishing 8th .
The weekend of March 9–11 , following its four Oscar wins , the film made $ 2.4 million .
It marked a 64 % increase from the previous week 's $ 1.5 million and was similar to the $ 2.5 million made by the previous year 's Best Picture winner , Moonlight . CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 92 % based on 388 reviews , with an average rating of 8.4/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads : " The Shape of Water finds Guillermo del Toro at his visually distinctive best — and matched by an emotionally absorbing story brought to life by a stellar Sally Hawkins performance . "
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 87 out of 100 , based on 53 critics , indicating " universal acclaim " .
According to CinemaScore , audience members under the age of 40 gave the film an average grade of either " A+ " or " A " , while those over 40 gave it an " A " or " A− " , on an A+ to F scale ; PostTrak reported filmgoers gave the film an overall positive score of 80 % .
Ben Croll of IndieWire gave the film an ' A ' rating and called it " one of del Toro 's most stunningly successful works ... also a powerful vision of a creative master feeling totally , joyously free .
" Writing for Rolling Stone , Peter Travers gave the film 3.5 out of 4 stars , praising Hawkins 's performance , the cinematography and del Toro 's direction , and saying : " Even as the film plunges into torment and tragedy , the core relationship between these two unlikely lovers holds us in thrall .
Del Toro is a world - class film artist .
There 's no sense trying to analyze how he does it . "
For the Minnesota Daily , Haley Bennett reacted positively , writing , " The Shape of Water has tenderness uncommon to del Toro films . ...
While The Shape of Water is n't groundbreaking , it is elegant and mesmerizing . "
Conversely , Rex Reed of the New York Observer gave the film 1 out of 4 stars and calling it " a loopy , lunkheaded load of drivel " and , referring to Hawkins 's role in Maudie , described people with disabilities as " defective creatures . "
Reed 's review was criticized for referring to Sally Hawkins ' mute character as " mentally handicapped " and for erroneously crediting actor Benicio del Toro as the film 's director .
TOP - TEN LISTS Section::::Top - ten lists .
The Shape of Water appeared on many critics ' year - end top - ten lists , among them :
* 1st — Anne Thompson , IndieWire
* 1st — Kenneth Turan , Los Angeles Times
* 1st — Sasha Stone , Awards Daily
* 1st —
Drew McWeeny , The Tracking Board
* 1st — Nicholas Barber , BBC
* 1st —
Mike Scott , The Times - Picayune
* 1st — James Verniere , Boston Herald * 1st — Borys Kit , The Hollywood Reporter
* 1st — Marjorie Baumgarten & Steve Davis , The Austin Chronicle
* 1st — Joe Morgenstern , The Wall Street Journal
* 2nd — David Rooney , The Hollywood Reporter
* 2nd — Mark Olsen , Los Angeles Times
* 3rd — Sheri Linden , The Hollywood Reporter *
3rd — Matthew Jacobs ,
HuffPost * 3rd — E. Oliver Whitney , ScreenCrush * 3rd — Alonso Duralde , TheWrap * 4th — Pete Hammond ,
Deadline Hollywood * 4th — Brian Tallerico , RogerEbert.com * 4th — Chris Bumbray , JoBlo.com * 5th — Marc Savlov ,
The Austin Chronicle * 5th — James Berardinelli ,
Reelviews * 5th —
Christopher Orr , The Atlantic * 5th — Gregory Ellwood , IndieWire
* 5th — Peter Hartlaub , San Francisco Chronicle
* 6th — Kimber Myers , IndieWire
* 6th — People
* 7th —
The Guardian * 7th — Peter Debruge , Variety * 7th — Peter Travers , Rolling Stone * 8th — Peter Howell , Toronto Star * 9th — Steve Erickson , RogerEbert.com
* 9th — Stephen Whitty , The Star - Ledger * 9th — Ryan Oliver , IndieWire * 10th — Danny Bowes , RogerEbert.com * 10th — Paste
* Top 10 ( listed alphabetically , not ranked ) — IGN
* Top 10 ( listed alphabetically , not ranked ) —
Ty Burr , The Boston Globe
* Top 10 ( listed alphabetically , not ranked )
— Moira Macdonald , The Seattle Times
* Top 10 ( listed alphabetically , not ranked ) — Walter Addiego , San Francisco Chronicle
* Top 10 ( listed alphabetically , not ranked )
— Calvin Wilson , St. Louis Post - Dispatch * Best of 2017 ( listed alphabetically , not ranked ) — Newsweek ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
The Shape of Water received 13 nominations at the 90th Academy Awards , the most of any film in the 2018 race .
It won in four categories : Best Production Design , Best Original Score , Best Director , and Best Picture .
It was the first science - fiction and the second fantasy film , overall , to win Best Picture since .
The film also spawned some debate about whether the fact that it was filmed in Canada , with a predominantly Canadian crew and many Canadian actors in the supporting roles , should have made it eligible to be nominated for the Canadian Screen Awards .
Under Academy of Canadian Cinema and Television rules , to qualify for CSA nominations under the rules for international coproductions at least 15 per cent of a film 's funding must come from a Canadian film studio .
Even the film 's Canadian co - producer , J. Miles Dale , stated that he supports the rules and does not believe the film should have been eligible .
LAWSUIT ALLEGING
PLAGIARISM
Section::::Lawsuit alleging plagiarism .
In February 2018 , the estate of Paul Zindel initiated a lawsuit in United States District Court for the Central District of California against director Guillermo del Toro and associate producer Daniel Kraus , alleging that The Shape of Water " brazenly copies the story , elements , characters , and themes " of Zindel 's 1969 work
Let Me Hear You Whisper , which depicts a cleaning lady bonding with a dolphin and attempting to rescue it from a secret research laboratory 's nefarious uses .
The complaint spends more than a dozen pages detailing alleged " overwhelming similarities " between the works .
Del Toro denied the claim of the Zindel estate , saying that " I have never read nor seen the play .
I 'd never heard of this play before making The Shape of Water , and none of my collaborators ever mentioned the play . "
Distributor Fox Searchlight also denied the claim and said that it would " vigorously defend " itself in court .
In July 2018 , Judge Percy Anderson dismissed the suit and stated that del Toro and Fox Searchlight were entitled to recover their legal costs .
The film also received accusations of plagiarism by Jean - Pierre Jeunet , the French director of the romantic comedy Amélie and the cult classic Delicatessen , whom he claimed that del Toro plagiarized some of the scenes within his works in Amelie , Delicatessen , and The City of Lost Children .
As for the former , he pointed out some of the similarities in the saturation of the colours , overall art direction and the use of anthropomorphic objects as well the music which is a reminiscent of Yann Tiersen 's soundtrack on the former .
Responding to Jeunet 's accusations of plagiarism by email , del Toro cited on the influences of Terry Gilliam 's work as the inspiration for The Shape of Water .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS