MAGGIE PIERCE Margaret " Maggie " Pierce , M.D. is a fictional character from the American television medical drama Grey 's Anatomy , which airs on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States .
The character was created by series producer Shonda Rhimes and is portrayed by actress Kelly McCreary from the tenth season 's penultimate episode onwards .
It is revealed in the season ten finale , Maggie 's biological parents are Richard Webber ( James Pickens Jr. ) and Ellis Grey ( Kate Burton ) , making her Meredith 's half - sister .
McCreary was upgraded to a series regular in the eleventh episode of the eleventh season .
Pierce has been described as " perky " and " chatty " , as well as focusing mostly on her academic career rather than social life .
She graduated from medical school at 19 and becomes the head of her department at the young age of 27 years old .
STORYLINES
Section::::Storylines .
Maggie is first introduced in the penultimate episode of the tenth season .
Cristina Yang interviews various different candidates to replace her as the head of her department in Cardiothoracic surgery .
Maggie , having finished high school and medical school early at 19 , becomes head of her department at 27 years old .
It is revealed in the season 10 finale
" Fear ( of the Unknown ) "
that Maggie 's biological mother was Ellis Grey .
Richard Webber is shocked by this , knowing he is her biological father .
Throughout the eleventh season , Webber struggles to deal with the revelation and keeps it from Maggie .
Maggie explains that 2 years prior , she looked for her birth mom and needed to go to the court for the records .
She found out that she was dead , but got her name , and discovered that she was an amazing surgeon that worked at the Seattle Grace Hospital .
She stated that that 's not why she took the job , but it 's " a little bit " why she took the interview .
When Maggie identifies Meredith Grey , her half - sister , she attempts to bond with her .
However , Meredith attempts to take charge and conflicts with her on a case .
After several arguments , Maggie tells Meredith that she is her half - sister .
Meredith , in disbelief , points out that she would know that her mother would be pregnant when she was five years old , as Maggie is five years younger than her .
Meredith works with Alex Karev to decide whether Maggie is lying or if she is wrong .
They discover she is correct .
Meredith gets flashes back to the time of her mother 's crisis at five years old , and remembers being at a hospital and hearing a screaming baby .
After several weeks , Webber admits to Maggie that he is her father .
Maggie is angry at him .
Later , when he comes to apologize for not being there as a father , Maggie corrects him and says he is not her father , as she has adoptive parents she loves , and that she is only angry because of his dishonesty and making her look foolish and naive for weeks .
Derek and Meredith decide to have Maggie come over to their house for dinner , to get to know Maggie better .
After Maggie says yes , Derek decides it is a good idea to ask Richard as well .
Richard reluctantly agrees .
The night of the dinner , Maggie and Richard show up , but no - one answers .
Maggie leaves him after that .
Maggie develops a relationship with radiologist , Ethan Boyd .
She admits her awkwardness in relationships , having ended her previous engagement to Dean , who she was unable to sleep in the same bed with .
Meredith ends up in a bind with no one to watch her kids , so Maggie offers to watch them .
Richard and Maggie eventually come to good terms , and Maggie 's helping with Meredith 's kids help her integrate into her family home more .
Maggie learns about the histories of Meredith , Alex and Callie Torres as they commemorate their dead friend , George O'Malley .
After Derek 's death , Meredith abandons Seattle for a year , leaving Maggie a note .
Maggie is shocked by this , and admits she felt abandoned by Meredith right when they were starting to become a family .
She invites Webber to a Christmas party , noticing his loneliness .
Meredith eventually returns home , hugging Maggie and re - integrating into her old family home .
While Maggie and her colleagues are busy dealing with Keith Gardner after a tunnel collapse , Maggie gets a phone call that her parents are getting a divorce .
Her mother confesses to her that she 'd been having an affair with their car serviceman for eleven years and they had only stayed together for her sake , but were getting a divorce now that she was out on her own .
Maggie is emotional about this , but she does n't want to bother her colleagues about it .
Later , she confides in Meredith over the issue , but feels it is silly in comparison to her husband 's death .
Meredith , however , says she can tell her anything
and she should come to her whenever she is having a problem .
After Meredith buys her house back from Alex , she invites Maggie and Amelia Shepherd to move in with her .
They assist Meredith in caring for her kids .
Maggie also often mediates between Meredith and Amelia , who frequently get into fights over little things .
She often helps with Meredith 's three kids , with each " sister " in charge of getting one kid ready for the day .
In the twelfth season , Maggie develops a relationship with intern Andrew DeLuca .
Maggie and DeLuca keep their relationship private to avoid difficulties at work .
DeLuca grows frustrated with their secrecy , so Maggie abruptly decides to go public .
When this happens , DeLuca becomes uncomfortable with the way he is viewed by others because he is dating an attending , and does n't want others to think he is getting special treatment .
He also feels intimidated by her authority and ultimately ends things with her .
Maggie attempts to move on and develops an interest in Nathan Riggs .
However , she is unaware that Meredith has a sexual relationship with him .
She confides in Meredith about her feelings at Amelia 's wedding to Owen Hunt .
In the thirteenth season , Maggie is hurt when she discovers that Meredith had been lying to her about Alex 's actions assaulting DeLuca .
She tells her to never lie to her again , but Meredith continues to hide her relationship with Riggs .
Riggs tells Meredith that she needs to tell Maggie and Maggie works up the courage to ask Riggs out , but Meredith told him to say no .
Maggie 's mother Diane also comes to the hospital and is treated by Jackson Avery for what turns out to be cancer .
Before Diane succumbs to her illness , she encourages Maggie to live a fuller life outside of her career .
Jackson is there for Maggie as she grieves , and the two grow closer .
It is n't until Jackson 's ex - wife April Kepner points out their bond that Jackson and Maggie realize their feelings for one another .
In the fourteenth season , Maggie and Jackson initially try to bury their feelings , but Jackson decides to pursue her .
They eventually begin a romantic relationship and attend Alex and Jo Wilson 's wedding together .
DEVELOPMENT CASTING AND CREATION Section::::Development .
Section::::Casting and creation .
On April 5 , 2014 , TVLine reported that Kelly McCreary best known for her series regular role on The CW 's short lived medical drama Emily Owens , M.D. and recent guest appearances on Scandal had been cast in a guest star role .
McCeary was slated to debut on the May 8 , 2015 episode .
On October 23 , 2014 , it was announced that McCreary was promoted to series regular after being credited as guest - starring until the eleventh episode .
It was a couple of months after McCreary wrapped her stint on Scandal that she was invited to audition for Grey 's .
McCeary revealed that she originally auditioned for the character of " Claudette " with dummy sides , unbeknownst to her .
The only information McCeary had about the character was " that she was adopted , that she would recur , and she was going to be a very important storyline . " Just before the script reading for the season 10 finale , Rhimes summoned McCeary to inform her of Maggie 's true identity .
" I was really psyched " McCeary revealed when Rhimes informed her of Maggie 's lineage .
" I felt really honored to be the one to accept the challenge . "
However , it was n't until McCeary experienced the reactions to Maggie 's existence from her fellow cast mates that McCeary realized just how big of a deal the character would be .
The character 's potential existence was first referenced in the press in February 2009 when Michael Ausiello hinted at the possibility of Meredith having a half - sibling , the product of her mother 's affair with Richard .
Initial speculation pointed to Jesse Williams ' Jackson Avery as the child , but the actor refuted those rumors .
Shonda Rhimes revealed that the character had always been a part of the original story plans , but the character 's existence was not set in stone until season 4 .
CHARACTERIZATION Section::::Characterization .
Kelly McCeary expressed her excitement about how special Maggie in an interview with BuddyTV .
" I just feel like it 's a rare opportunity to be able to play somebody that is so complex and fully realized and smart and fierce and compassionate and awkward and the whole thing . " Maggie is very good at her job so she can find a place in a professional capacity , but in her personal life , she " gets more than she bargained for " McCreary said .
" I think she 's a really good doctor "
McCeary said of Maggie .
" She 's obviously super - bright .
She 's very young to be as high in her field as she is . "
McCeary further described Maggie as a " really great problem - solver .
" Maggie is " very compassionate " and at the same time can " keep a clear head and do the right thing medically all the time . "
McCeary further described Maggie as " so dynamic . "
While Maggie initially " came across as all business , " Kelly McCeary relishes in playing " Maggie 's neurotic , existential , meltdown side . "
" Maggie also wo n't really back down from a fight ; she 's very decisive . "
INTRODUCTION Section::::Introduction .
Kate Aurthur noted that until Maggie 's introduction , Grey 's was not " known for dropping in stories that it planted seasons before -- it 's never been filled with twisty mythology .
"
Rhimes insisted that the timing was n't right for Maggie 's introduction in previous seasons .
In season 3 , the series introduced Meredith 's paternal half - sister Lexie Grey ( Chyler Leigh ) and it was at that time that Maggie became a serious topic of discussion .
Though Lexie was killed off in the season 8 finale , " Flight , " Rhimes felt it was still too soon for Maggie 's arrival .
The scribe even thought the show might end without the character ever being introduced . "
Then we hit this moment in time
and I remember walking into the writers ' room and going , ' You guys , it 's time . '
"
When Maggie makes the sudden revelation that she is Ellis ' child to Richard , viewers are left to wonder about her history .
The second episode of the season puts Maggie front and center .
The episode appropriately titled " Puzzle With a Piece Missing , " focuses on Maggie 's struggle to fit in throughout her life , even with her own adoptive parents whom she is very different from .
Though she is very close with her parents , and they get along very well , she 's grown up " still feeling like something 's missing . "
Kelly McCreary said " That 's what 's really compelling to me about Maggie : that sort of dark underbelly of this person who seems to really have it all together . "
Maggie struggles to build relationships with her colleagues .
She unknowingly shares confidential information about Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) and she gets she also insults the hospital board when she tries to prop up Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) .
Though she 's got the " best intentions , " things backfire .
Maggie also serves as a " mentor " to Jo Wilson ( Camilla Luddington ) .
As Maggie discovers she has several things in common with Richard , the stage is set for Maggie to learn that Richard is her father .
" I think people will relate to the awkwardness of being the new kid at school "
McCeary said of the episode 's comedic tone .
Despite so many different interactions , the episode highlights " Maggie 's loneliness . "
The Maggie - centric episode also featured Kelly McCreary stepping into the coveted role of narrator for the episode , which was usually reserved for Ellen Pompeo 's Meredith , and on occasion other veteran cast members .
" It was overwhelming and very surprising " McCeary said of being the center of attention so early into her Grey 's tenure .
She continued , " I felt terrified and also really grateful that they trusted me with the institution about of Grey 's Anatomy for a whole episode . "
McCeary relished in finally learning the character 's history . "
[ It ] was a huge gift to have 65 pages worth of material telling me exactly who she is .
It was great ! "
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Critics responded positively to the development of Pierce in her centric episode " Puzzle With a Piece Missing " .
Fempop gave a largely positive review writing , " Puzzle With a Piece Missing is a funny and insightful look both into this latest interloper and the established characters of Grey 's .
" praising the new addition , " Thankfully she 's
( Pierce )
her own person , confident and happy to bring the thunder and put everyone , from interns to the chief of surgery , into their places . "
Entertainment Weekly lauded the episode stating , " Coming into the second week without Cristina Yang ,
Grey 's was smart to focus all of its attention on the newcomer .
With most other main characters only making occasional cameos , it made it more difficult to feel Yang 's absence .
And by showing Maggie 's side of the story , it made her more relatable .
It was a win - win . "
adding on McCreary 's character , " this episode is about how Maggie is her own , very likable person . "
On her character TV Fanatic wrote , Overall , we got to know Maggie a little better
and it 's nice to see that she 's made some friends .
It was a fair episode that showed Maggie 's basically a work in progress .
Maybe she 'll grow on us eventually . "
For the thirteenth season , Vulture writer , Maggie Fremont spoke positively about the character : " It 's never easy for a long - running series to introduce a new character , especially when that character is meant to immediately fit in with the rest of the ensemble .
But when Maggie Pierce arrived in season ten , that 's exactly what Grey 's Anatomy did .
It could 've been easy to dislike her — she showed up to take over cardio as Cristina Yang was leaving , for chrissakes !
She was yet another one of Meredith 's long - lost sisters .
The cards were really stacked against Maggie Pierce .
Yet , thanks to the writers and Kelly McCreary 's terrific performance , Maggie was immediately endearing .
She is weird and neurotic and cheerful .
She is nothing like Cristina , but she fills a void that Meredith needs filled in order to function .
Can you really imagine Grey 's without Maggie Pierce ? "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Maggie Piece at ABC.com * Maggie Pierce on IMDb