DOCTOR DOCTOR ( AUSTRALIAN TV SERIES )
Doctor Doctor ( also known outside of Australasia as The Heart Guy ) is an Australian television drama that premiered on the Nine Network on 14 September 2016 .
It follows the story of Hugh Knight , a rising heart surgeon who is gifted , charming and infallible .
He is a hedonist who , due to his sheer talent , believes he can live outside the rules .
His " work hard , play harder " philosophy is about to come back and bite him .
On 28 September 2016 , Nine renewed the program for a second season after just two episodes having been aired .
On 11 October 2017 , the series was renewed for a third season at Nine 's upfronts .
and premiered on Monday , 6 August 2018 , instead of the previous Wednesday night slot .
On 17 October 2018 the series was renewed for a fourth season .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
After a spectacular fall from grace , high - flying heart surgeon Dr Hugh Knight receives a life - changing punishment from the Medical Tribunal — he is forced to work for a year as a country GP in his former home town of Whyhope .
Now the only way to salvage his brilliant career is to work as a lowly GP in an under - resourced , small - town hospital surrounded by estranged family , former friends , crazed colleagues , oddball patients , jealous brothers and a newlywed ex - girlfriend .
CAST MAIN * Rodger Corser as Hugh Knight * Nicole da Silva as Charlie Perreira Knight
* Ryan Johnson as Matt Knight * Tina Bursill as Meryl Knight
* Hayley McElhinney as Penny Cartwright * Chloe Bayliss as Hayley Mills Knight
* Matt Castley as Ajax Cross Knight
* Belinda Bromilow as Betty Bell * Shalom Brune - Franklin as Aoife ( season 1 )
* Charles Wu as Ken Liu
* Steve Bisley as Jim Knight ( season 1 - 2 ; recurring during 3 )
* Brittany Scott Clark as Mia Holston ( season 2− ) SUPPORTING * Dave Eastgate as Joey ( season 1 ) * Lucy Durack as Chantelle ' Tugger ' Waugh * John Batchelor as Nathan
* Winta McGrath as Floyd
* Thomas Swords as Papa
Pex
* Angus McLaren as Dr Carl Toke ( season 2 )
* Annabel Wolfe as Ivy ( season 3 )
PRODUCTION
CONCEPTION
Section::::Production .
Section::::Conception .
The series entered pre - production in Early 2016 , with executive producers Andy Ryan and Jo Rooney of the Nine Network and Ian Collie , Claudia Karvan and Tony McNamara of Essential Media and Entertainment .
The Nine Network confirmed that Doctor Doctor would commence production in April 2016 with filming taking place in Sydney and country NSW .
In a statement , Nine 's Head of Drama , Jo Rooney and Andy Ryan , commented " We are delighted to join forces with Essential Media & Entertainment on the irreverent new family drama series " .
Inspiration for the series came from discussions that Tony McNamara had with lawyers who talked with him about the Impaired Registrants Program , a practice operated by the Medical Council of New South Wales , which seeks to ensure that medical practitioners are fit for practice and in doing so , the program manages doctors who suffer from a psychiatric illness , self - administration of drugs , alcohol abuse , and physical illness .
The series is produced by Essential Media and Entertainment and its first season created 800 jobs and production expenditure of $ 11.6 million in Sydney and Mudgee , as well as $ 300,000 in grants from Screen NSW .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
The casting director of Doctor Doctor is Kirsty McGregor , who has worked for casting on popular television series , such as Modern Family and Top of the Lake .
It was announced in early 2016 that Roger Corser had received the leading role in the series as heart surgeon , Hugh Knight , before the Nine Network has formally announced the series .
Corser was still appearing on the ABC drama series
The Doctor Blake Mysteries , for which he only appeared in Season 4 in 2016 , and of the role he said that " he [ I ] was enjoying playing a different style of character to those he [ I ] had previously played .
" It was then confirmed that Nicole Da Silva would be cast in the role of Charlie Knight .
Da Silva was currently filming the fourth season of Wentworth , appearing in for only six of the twelve episodes and in a supporting status , due to her new starring role in Doctor Doctor , she had to travel between Sydney and Melbourne switching between roles .
It also saw her reconnect with her former Rush co - star , Roger Corser .
In an early announcement , it was stated that additional supporting cast would consist of Ryan Johnson , Hayley McElhinney , Shalom Brune - Franklin , Tina Bursill , Chloe Bayliss and Dave Eastgate
It was later revealed that Steve Bisley would appear in the series as Jim Knight .
For the second season of Doctor Doctor , it was announced that Packed to the Rafters star Angus McLaren would join the cast as ex - army medic , Dr Toke , after a three - year hiatus from acting in television , while it had also been confirmed that New Zealand actress , Brittany Scott Clark , formerly of soap opera Shortland Street , would portray Nurse Mia Holston .
Ahead of Season 3 , during a promo which screened in June 2018 on the Nine Network , it was revealed that the show would be losing a major character ; in a spoiler , it was revealed to be Jim Knight .
In May 2018 , it was announced , that Steve Bisley would be returning for the third season , however , he only appeared in the opening episode .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
The series is filmed on location in Mudgee , a town in the Central West of New South Wales , while the entirety of the hospital scenes are shot in the Sydney inner - city suburb of Rozelle , which is located in the city 's inner - west .
The filming of Knight 's home was shot in Sydney 's south - west section in the town of Camden .
The regional setting for the series has proved to be beneficial for narrative and production purposes .
It has been stated that in addition to $ 100,000 worth of support from the Regional Filming Fund , the regional setting delivers a unique authenticity to the series that it would otherwise lack .
Due to the success of the first season , The Knight 's home , which was filmed in an actual house , was recreated within a disused wing of the building used to film the hospital scenes from the second season onwards ; this was due to limited space in the original home .
In 2017 , Ian Collie departed Essential Media in order to establish his own production company , Easy Tiger Tiger , from which Doctor Doctor is currently produced under as of its second season .
The company is majority owned by FremantleMedia .
THEME SONG Section::::Theme song .
The theme song is a cover version of the American band Canned Heat song Going Up the Country , performed by Patience Hodgson of the Australian indie / alternative rock band The Grates .
The song is not available for international airings of the series as the opening theme is replaced with the same instrumental music which is used over the end credits .
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
Doctor Doctor was broadcast on the Nine Network on Wednesday nights 8.40pm during its first two seasons ; it was moved to Monday nights at 8.40 pm for its third season .
It is also broadcast later in New Zealand on TVNZ 1 .
The series , which is internationally re - titled as The Heart Guy and airs on PayTV broadcaster , Sky Deutschland for Germany , Austria and Switzerland .
In Norway the series are available on TV2 Sumo .
The program is also available in the United States with the title The Heart Guy , where new episodes premiere on the streaming network Acorn TV In the United Kingdom , the series premiered on 8 April 2018 on Drama where it is broadcast Sunday nights at 8 pm .
The second season premiered on 17 June 2018 .
Drama has secured the rights to screen the third season , although a premiere date has not yet been confirmed .
For catch - up streaming , It is available on demand from 9Now in Australia , and is also on demand in the UK from UKTV Play .
Persian expat Manoto aired the first season from October 2018 for Iran , Afghanistan and Tajikistan .
EPISODES RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
Reviews for the series have been generally positive .
In a review from Debi Enker for The Sydney Morning Herald , she stated that in contrast of other medical dramas it " Takes a different approach .
It 's gentler , funnier , and it 's set in the country . "
Steve Molk of DeciderTV mentioned that " Doctor Doctor is dependable , honest and sincere Aussie Drama with a full cast stronger than has been seen in a long time . "
In a review for the online website , The Medium is Not Enough , the series was given a more mixed reception , when it was criticized for becoming more serious following the first episode with a mix of humour in turns ; mentioning " If you 're going to get serious then you need to do it consistently , not just in bits you like " .
However it was said of the series that " A decent enough show with potential that 's already been rewarded with a second season , Doctor Doctor nevertheless needs to look hard at what it wants to be in life if it 's to avoid losing patience . "
AWARD NOMINATIONS Section::::Award nominations .
Doctor Doctor has been nominated for a total of 13 awards ; in 2016 , Kirsty McGregor was nominated for a Casting Guild of Australia Award ( CGA ) for Best Casting in a TV Drama , while in 2017 , at the AACTA Awards , Tina Bursill was nominated for Best Guest or Supporting Actress in a Television Drama .
The series received most of its nominations at the Logie Award , where Roger Corser has been nominated for the Gold Logie Award for Most Popular Personality on Australian Television twice in 2017 and 2018 , as well as the Silver Logie Award for Most Popular Actor in 2017 and 2018 , and the Silver Logie Award Most Outstanding Actor in a Series in 2017 and 2018 , while additional 2017 nominations consisted of Ryan Johnson for the Silver Logie Award for Most Outstanding Supporting Actor , Shalom Brune - Franklin for the Silver Logie Award for Best New Talent and the series itself for the Silver Logie Award for Most Popular Drama Program , and , additional 2018 nominations consisted of the series winning twice for the Logie Award for Most Popular Drama Program and the Logie Award for Most Outstanding Drama Series .
The series has not yet been the recipient of any awards .
RATINGS
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media . !
width=150 rowspan=2DVD
Title !
rowspan=2Episodes !
rowspan=2Discs !
colspan=3Release date !
colspan=2Rating !
rowspan=2Additional !
Region 1 !
Region 2 !
Region 4 !
FSK !
ACB !
colspan="13"Standard sets !
colspan="13"Multiple sets SEE
ALSO
* List of Australian television series * List of medical drama television programs REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS