THE MIST ( TV SERIES )
The Mist is an American science fiction - horror thriller television series developed by Christian Torpe .
It is based on the horror novella of the same name by author Stephen King .
The series aired for one 10-episode season on Spike from June 22 to August 24 , 2017 .
On September 27 , 2017 , Spike cancelled the series .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
An unexplained mist slowly envelops the town of Bridgeville , Maine , creating an almost impenetrable barrier to visibility .
The residents of the town soon learn the situation is even more precarious as unexplained anomalies and phenomena in the mist attack and kill most who enter it , trapping several groups of people in a shopping mall , a church , and a hospital .
Eventually , people begin to see apparitions in the mist from their past , fears , or guilt that help or kill them depending on how they react .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN * Morgan Spector as Kevin Copeland * Alyssa Sutherland as Eve Copeland
* Gus Birney as Alex Copeland
* Danica Curcic as Mia Lambert * Okezie Morro as Bryan Hunt
* Luke Cosgrove as Jay Heisel
* Darren Pettie as Connor Heisel
* Russell Posner as Adrian Garff * Frances Conroy as Nathalie Raven
RECURRING
* Dan Butler as Father Romanov
* Isiah Whitlock Jr. as Gus Bradley
* Romaine Waite as Kyle * Irene Bedard as Kimi Lucero * Christopher Gray as Tyler Denton
* Greg Hovanessian as Wes Foster
* Erik Knudsen as Vic * Alexandra Ordolis as Shelley DeWitt EPISODES
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Following the release of Frank Darabont 's film adaptation of The Mist in 2007 , executive producers Bob Weinstein and Harvey Weinstein announced plans to develop a miniseries based on the film .
In November 2013 , Bob Weinstein announced that a 10-part miniseries would begin production under their Dimension Television banner .
It was unclear if film director Darabont would be involved in the series and the development remained stagnant for a period of time .
In September 2015 , nearly two years after the project was announced , Dimension Television announced they had signed screenwriter Christian Torpe to pen the entire series .
In February 2016 , Spike picked up the pilot .
In April 2016 , it was announced a deal had been reached with Spike to air the entire series .
In July 2016 , the production company announced the series had been cast and gone into production in Halifax , Nova Scotia .
FINANCING
Section::::Financing .
The ten episodes of the first season were reportedly produced on a budget of approximately $ 23 million .
The government of Nova Scotia announced in July 2016 that it would contribute $ 5.9 million for the series .
The production marks the biggest entertainment production ever to shoot in the province .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
In July 2016 , Dimension Television announced Morgan Spector would play the lead character of Kevin Copeland .
Other cast members announced included Frances Conroy , Alyssa Sutherland , Zenna Davis - Jones , Gus Birney , Dan Butler , Luke Cosgrove , Danica Curcic , Okezie Morro , Darren Pettie , Russell Posner and Isiah Whitlock ,
Jr. RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
After the pilot episode received strong ratings , viewer numbers rapidly declined .
The series averaged a rating of 0.14 in adults aged 18–49 , and 462,000 viewers per episode in Nielsen 's Live+Same Day ratings .
The series was cancelled in September 2017 .
The first season of The Mist received mixed reviews .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes the series has a rating of 62 % based on 39 reviews .
On Metacritic , the series has a score of 54 out of 100 , based on 25 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Chris Scott of the Observer described it as " relentlessly bleak , mean , and downright sadistic at nearly every turn " , linking this with the falling ratings over the series course .
Indiewire reviewer Ben Travers described the plot as predictable and characters as " pretty awful " , leaving viewers " rooting for the mist instead of those running from it " .
Ed Power of the Daily Telegraph felt that it was a middling effort for King 's works , and that it benefited from sticking to familiar horror themes and tropes .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS