HUSH ( 2016 FILM )
Hush is a 2016 American slasher film directed and edited by Mike Flanagan , starring Kate Siegel , who also co - wrote the film with Flanagan .
The film co - stars John Gallagher Jr. , Michael Trucco , Samantha Sloyan , and Emilia " Emma " Graves .
It was jointly produced by Trevor Macy through Intrepid Pictures and Jason Blum through Blumhouse Productions .
The film had its world premiere at South by Southwest on March 12 , 2016 , and was released by Netflix on April 8 , 2016 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Madison " Maddie " Young is a deaf girl who temporarily lost her ability to hear and speak after a bout of bacterial meningitis at the age of 13 and lost both permanently after a corrective surgery gone wrong .
She lives in a house , isolated in the woods .
Her friend and neighbor Sarah visits her one day to return a copy of her book .
In discussing Maddie 's writing , she describes how her stories play out in her head like a film and she can see all the possible endings .
That night , a masked killer chases Sarah to Maddie 's house .
A bloodied Sarah bangs on the door for help , but Maddie can not hear her , and the man stabs her to death .
The man quickly learns Maddie is deaf and sneaks into the house , steals her phone , takes photos of her and sends them to her .
Realizing this , she locks herself inside the house .
The man cuts the power and sabotages her car .
Maddie writes on the glass - paneled front door " wo n't tell , did n't see face , boyfriend coming home " with her lipstick .
However , the man responds by taking off his mask .
Maddie unsuccessfully tries to distract him with her car alarm to get Sarah 's phone from her body , but she manages to stab his arm with a hammer 's claw .
He mocks Maddie , revealing he has the phone as well .
She makes several failed attempts to escape through the window and ends up climbing onto the roof .
The man fires a crossbow bolt and hits her leg , but she manages to knock him off the roof and grab his crossbow .
She staggers back into the house , removing the bolt from her leg before trying to reload the crossbow .
John , Sarah 's boyfriend , arrives and looks for Sarah .
The man meets John , pretending to be a police officer responding to a call , and delivers a false story of how he was rendered unconscious by an intruder .
He asks for John 's phone , faking a call for police backup .
He attempts to pocket John 's phone
but when John asks for his phone back , the man inadvertently pulls out a heart - shaped earring from his pocket and John sees it drop .
Suspicious , John points out the flaws in the story , stating that Maddie is deaf and mute and therefore unable to make a call .
He tries to distract the attacker by telling him he thinks Maddie keeps a spare key in a planter and grabbing a rock , he is ready to attack the man when Maddie bangs on the windows and pulls his attention away .
When John turns , the man stabs him in the neck .
As John bleeds out , he uses his remaining strength to put the man in a chokehold , mouthing " run " to Maddie .
Maddie attempts to run but is caught and bludgeoned to death with a rock , before it is revealed that this is an ending playing out in her head , the way her stories do .
She realised that any attempt to hide or escape will result in her bleeding out or getting caught , so she decides her only option is to take the man off guard and kill him .
The man threatens Maddie 's cat with a knife , but she fires a bolt from the porch , hitting him in the shoulder .
While running back inside , she drops the remaining bolt .
When she attempts to grab it , the man slams the sliding door shut on her wrist , then he crushes her hand with his boot .
Continuing to play his game of cat and mouse , the man allows Maddie to close and lock the door .
He threatens to enter the house , to which Maddie writes " do it , coward " on the door with her own blood .
While the man begins bashing the glass with a tire iron , Maddie thinking she may end up dying , quickly types a description of the man , a message to her family , and " died fighting " on her laptop before running to the bathroom with a knife , waiting for the man to enter .
Having difficulty breaking in through the front door , he crashes through the skylight into the bathroom , unbeknownst to Maddie .
The man 's breathing inadvertently alerts Maddie , who narrowly avoids his attack and stabs him in the knee .
She stumbles into the kitchen , her vision beginning to blur .
When approached in the kitchen , she sprays the man 's eyes with insecticide and disorients him with her visual smoke alarm .
However , the man overpowers her , throwing her down and strangling her .
On the verge of death , Maddie 's life flashes before her eyes , and in a last ditch effort she grabs a corkscrew within arm 's reach and plunges it into his throat , finally killing him .
Maddie retrieves her cellphone from the man and dials 911 before stumbling outside and sitting on the porch .
Maddie 's cat sits next to her , rubbing against her leg .
As the police near her house , Maddie closes her eyes , pets her cat , and smiles .
As Maddie smiles , the sounds around her swell in a similar fashion to the moments when the scenarios she plays out in her head end , and it is left decidedly unclear if she made it out at all .
CAST
* Kate Siegel as Maddie Young
* John Gallagher Jr. as The Man
* Michael Trucco as John Stanley
* Samantha Sloyan as Sarah Greene * Emilia Graves as Max PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Nothing was known about the project until September 2015 , when it was revealed at a buyers ' screening which occurred at the 2015 Toronto International Film Festival .
It was revealed Mike Flanagan had directed and written the film , along with his wife Kate Siegel who also stars in it .
On making the main character a deaf mute , Flanagan had said it originated from him wanting to do a movie " without dialogue " .
The possibility of making the film entirely silent was briefly considered , but was soon abandoned when it was realized that building tension with this limitation would be " impossible " Flanagan also noted that the target audience would not have been used to silent films and , as such , would " seek out every kind of audio stimulus anywhere else in the environment " or simply choose to not watch the film at all .
The script itself consisted largely of scene directions , which Flanagan and Siegel developed by acting out in their own house .
The fact that so much of the script was based around Flanagan and Siegel 's own house proved problematic for filming , as when they went to shoot the film in Alabama , they could not find a house similar enough to theirs and had to significantly alter the film 's script .
Flanagan also found challenges in the single location and had to plan the cinematography to keep the film interesting to the audience , especially given the mute nature of the protagonist ; to this end , Flanagan used a Steadicam to follow Siegel 's every move , along with a boom mic and a spotter , to make the movement more " dynamic " .
The resulting audio for these scenes could not be used and had to be redone in post , with Flanagan noting that the audio initially " sounded like a herd of elephants . "
To represent Maddie 's world , various ambient sounds were used , such as the sound of ultrasound machines .
Flanagan did not want to use pure silence for these scenes , as he still felt it would make viewers even more aware of their surrounding and take them out of the experience .
As a result of the aforementioned camera set in , Siegel had to ADR her own breath into the final film .
The film 's soundtrack was composed by The Newton Brothers .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film had its world premiere at South by Southwest on March 12 , 2016 .
Prior to the premiere , Netflix acquired worldwide distribution rights to the film , which it released on April 8 . RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
On review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes Hush has an approval rating of 92 % based on 24 reviews , with an average rating of 7.6/10 .
On Metacritic , the film has a score of 67 out of 100 based on reviews from 7 critics indicating " Generally favorable reviews " .
Benjamin Lee of The Guardian said that Hush " offers ingenious suspense " and awarded it four out of five stars .
Geoff Burkshire of Variety , though criticizing the film 's third act , called it " one of the more inspired concoctions to emerge from the busy Blumhouse horror - thriller assembly line in recent years . "
Michael Gingold of Fangoria gave the film 3.5/4 stars , calling it " a good old - fashioned truly scary movie " .
Jasef Wisener of TVOvermind gave the film a 4.7/5 , noting that " Thanks to the performances from its two leads , Hush succeeds in almost every aspect and delivers one of the best horror films in modern history . "
Richard Newby of the website
Audiences Everywhere called the film " a modern slasher movie classic that 's not to be missed . "
Stephen King wrote about the film on April 20 , 2016 , saying , " How good is Hush ?
Up there with Halloween and , even more , Wait Until Dark .
White knuckle time .
On Netflix . "
Filmmaker William Friedkin , director of The Exorcist , also commented on the film , saying " HUSH is a great horror film ... on Netflix .
Terrifying . "
SEE ALSO
* List of films featuring home invasions
* List of films featuring the deaf and hard of hearing REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS