ONCE UPON A TIME ( SEASON 6 )
The sixth season of the American ABC fantasy - drama Once Upon a Time was ordered on March 3 , 2016 .
It debuted on September 25 , 2016 , and concluded on May 14 , 2017 .
In January 2017 , it was stated that the sixth season would end the main storyline , and for a seventh season , the series would be softly rebooted with a new storyline .
Existing fictional characters introduced to the series during the season include Aladdin , Princess Jasmine , the Count of Monte Cristo , Captain Nemo , Lady Tremaine , Beowulf , Tiger Lily and the Tin Man .
Original new characters include Gideon , the Black Fairy , Mary Lydgate , and Robert .
The show also reintroduced Jafar and Dr. Arthur Lydgate , who previously appeared in Once Upon a Time in Wonderland .
This season also marks the final appearance of Emma Swan ( Jennifer Morrison ) as a series regular .
Morrison announced she would be departing the series after the sixth - season finale , but if the series receives a seventh season renewal she has agreed to appear in at least one episode .
After serving as a series regular for two seasons , Rebecca Mader also announced that season six would be her last on the show as a regular .
Shortly after , Adam Horowitz and Edward Kitsis announced that original cast members Ginnifer Goodwin , Josh Dallas , and Jared Gilmore , as well as Emilie de Ravin who joined the main cast in season two , would also exit the show at the end of the season .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
The residents of Storybrooke are faced with threats from the Evil Queen and Mr. Hyde , both with different agendas following the arrival of refugees from the Land of Untold Stories .
This leads to events to test Emma 's savior abilities that results in the arrival of the Black Fairy to begin the Final Battle that was prophesied centuries ago .
As dark and light collides , a new , and darker curse is unleashed , leading to the fall of all the realms with magic .
The Final Battle is fought and won , leading to the heroes earning their happy beginnings , but a new adventure begins in the far future for an adult Henry involving his daughter Lucy , and another curse looming across the New Enchanted Forest inhabitants .
CAST AND CHARACTERS REGULAR
* Ginnifer Goodwin as Snow White
/ Mary Margaret Blanchard
* Jennifer Morrison as Emma Swan * Lana Parrilla as Evil Queen / Regina Mills * Josh Dallas as Prince Charming / David Nolan * Emilie de Ravin as Belle / Lacey * Colin O'Donoghue as Captain Hook / Killian Jones * Jared S. Gilmore as Henry Mills
* Rebecca Mader as Wicked Witch of the West / Zelena * Robert Carlyle as Rumplestiltskin /
Mr. Gold RECURRING
* Beverley Elliott as Widow Lucas / Granny * Raphael Sbarge as Jiminy Cricket / Dr. Archie Hopper * Lee Arenberg as Dreamy / Grumpy /
Leroy * David Paul Grove as Doc * Gabe Khouth as Sneezy /
Mr. Clark * Faustino Di Bauda as Sleepy / Walter
* Mig Macario as Bashful
* Geoff Gustafson as Stealthy
* Tony Amendola as Geppetto / Marco * Keegan Connor Tracy as the Blue Fairy /
Mother Superior * Eion Bailey as Pinocchio / August Booth
* David Anders as Victor Frankenstein /
Dr. Whale * Jessy Schram as Cinderella / Ashley Boyd
* Tim Phillipps as Prince Thomas /
Sean Herman
* Gabrielle Rose as Ruth
* Alan Dale as King George / Albert Spencer
* Jaime Murray as Fiona / the Black Fairy * Giles Matthey as Gideon / Morpheus * Sean Maguire as Robin of Locksley * Tony Perez as Prince Henry
* Rose McIver as Tinker Bell
* JoAnna Garcia Swisher as Ariel
* Gil McKinney as Prince Eric * Giancarlo Esposito as Magic Mirror / Sidney Glass * Chris Gauthier as William Smee * Hank Harris as Dr. Henry Jekyll
* Sam Witwer as Mr. Hyde * Deniz Akdeniz as Aladdin * Karen David as Princess Jasmine
* Olivia Steele Falconer as Violet * Tzi Ma as the Dragon * Patrick Fischler as Isaac Heller
* Sara Tomko as Tiger Lily * Wil Traval as the Sheriff of Nottingham / Keith
GUEST
* Oded Fehr as Jafar * Tarun Keram as Emir * Jordyn Ashley Olson as the Oracle * Craig Horner as Edmond Dantès / Count of Monte Cristo
* Andrea Brooks as Charlotte * Andrew Kavadas as Baron Danglars
* Lisa Banes as Lady Tremaine
* Mekenna Melvin as Clorinda Tremaine * Goldie Hoffman as Tisbe Tremaine
* Max Lloyd - Jones as Jacob * Jarod Joseph as Gus /
Billy
* Jonny Coyne as Dr. Arthur Lydgate * Elizabeth Blackmore as Mary Lydgate
*
Reilly Jacob as Tom Sawyer * Cedric De Souza as the Sultan * Kate Dion - Richard as Goldilocks * Faran Tahir as Captain Nemo
* Nick Eversman as First Mate Liam Jones II
* Paul Johansson as Gabriel / the Woodcutter * Nick Hunnings as Jack * Tammy Gillis as Jill * Mckenna Grace as young Emma
* Rustin Gresiuk as teen August / Pinocchio
* Jack Davies as young Pinocchio
* David Cubitt as Robert
* Tara Wilson as young Ruth * Luke Roessler as young David / young James
* Brandon Spink as young Baelfire * Torstein Bjørklund as Beowulf
* Zahf Paroo as Prince Achmed * Charles Mesure as Blackbeard * Anton Starkman as young Gideon * Grayson Gabriel as Roderick * Mason McKenzie as young Roderick
* Isabella Blake - Thomas as young Zelena * Alex Désert as Stanum / Tin Man * Austin Obiajunwa as young Stanum
* Stephen Lord as Malcolm * Andrew J. West as adult Henry Mills * Alison Fernandez as Lucy EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Executive producers Adam Horowitz and Edward Kitsis announced that they were ending the half - season arc structure that was seen in seasons three through five , with Horowitz saying , " We 're also planning a 22-episode story as opposed to breaking it up into two halves this year .
It has been really exciting and fun . "
Kitsis added : " We are changing around what we 're doing this year and going back to that season 1 mentality of small town stories and smaller arcs . "
This season will focus on Storybrooke as the main setting , but will also show new realms and there will be the exploration of the Savior 's mythology .
Kitsis and Horowitz hired two directors from their Freeform series Dead of Summer , Norman Buckley , Mairzee Almas , and Michael Schultz helm episodes of the season .
Jennifer Lynch directed the eighth episode of the season , " I 'll Be Your Mirror " .
In January 2017 , ABC president Channing Dungey had been the first to suggest that the current narrative of the show would end with season six , regardless of whether or not there is a season seven .
Shortly after this news , Jennifer Morrison revealed that the contracts for the original main cast members were expiring in April , expressing uncertainty about the future of the show and her participation in it beyond the current season .
Robert Carlyle also expressed that he 'd have to make a decision about his future on the show by the end of that month .
In March 2017 , several sources had reported that four of the current main cast members in particular - Morrison , Carlyle , Lana Parrilla , and Colin O'Donoghue - were in negotiations to renew their contracts for a potential seventh season .
In April 2017 , Horowitz and Kitsis confirmed that a group of characters will indeed have their stories wrapped up by the end of the season in acknowledging the potential cast changes , saying : " We planned this finale from the beginning of the year , so whoever stays and whoever goes ... all those questions have already been dealt with .
The audience does not have to fear [ anything feeling ] incomplete . "
On May 8 , Morrison confirmed that she had declined an offer to remain on the show and that the sixth season would be her last , signaling the end of Emma 's time on the show as the main protagonist .
On May 11 , Rebecca Mader announced that she would also be leaving the show at the end of the season , citing creative decisions beyond her control .
On May 12 , season six was announced to be the last for four additional main actors : Ginnifer Goodwin , Josh Dallas , Jared Gilmore , and Emilie de Ravin .
Thus , characters seeing their storylines wrapped up in the season six finale include Emma Swan , Snow White , Prince Charming , Belle , and Zelena .
The season finale revealed that Henry Mills will remain a series protagonist , with the setting shifting to a later time period in which he is portrayed as an adult by Andrew J. West .
MUSICAL EPISODE
Section::::Musical episode .
In January 2017 , TV Line reported that the series would feature a musical episode later in the season .
Creators Kitsis and Horowitz had spoken about the desire to do a musical installment previously , but did n't " even know where to begin .
" Kitsis and Horowitz confirmed the report in February .
They have also since confirmed that the episode will feature 7 original songs , including solos by Jennifer Morrison and Rebecca Mader , as well as a " sing - off " musical number featuring the Evil Queen and the Charmings .
Composers Alan Zachary and Michael Weiner will be writing the original numbers featured , with arrangements provided by the show 's long - time composer Mark Isham .
Kitsis and Hororwitz spoke about the nature of the episode saying , " It actually is a huge part of the mythology of the show and there are some big things that happen in the episode , frankly , it 's been one of the challenges of doing the musical because we never wanted to do something where it was just like a to - the - side , one - off thing , and then get back to the main story .
We want to see it part of the main story , which meant we had to really plan out this season with some great detail . "
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Emilie de Ravin told fans that she will be returning for the sixth season .
It was also announced later that Sam Witwer and Hank Harris have signed a contract to play two new recurring characters on the sixth season of the show .
On March 29 , 2016 , Lana Parrilla confirmed she would be returning for the sixth season .
Robert Carlyle was confirmed to be returning for the sixth season as Rumplestiltskin along with Rebecca Mader as Zelena and Jared Gilmore as Henry Mills .
It was announced that Giles Matthey was cast as Morpheus , who is slated to appear in the first episode of the season .
On July 20 , it was announced that Craig Horner would be portraying the Count of Monte Cristo , who was introduced in the second episode of the season .
At the 2016 San Diego Comic Con International it was revealed that the season would see the introduction of Aladdin ( Deniz Akdeniz ) , and his story featuring the return of Jafar , now portrayed by Oded Fehr ( the role had been previously played by Naveen Andrews on Once Upon a Time in Wonderland ) .
Andrews was unavailable due to his previous commitment to Netflixs Sense8 .
It was also announced that Galavants Karen David was cast as Princess Jasmine .
She made her debut in the fourth episode of the season .
In early July , it was announced that Raphael Sbarge would be reprising his role as Jiminy Cricket / Dr. Archie Hopper in the season premiere .
The character 's last appearance was in the season 4 episode " Rocky Road . "
On July 20 , it was announced that Jessy Schram would be reprising her role as Cinderella in the third episode of the season .
The episode explored a connection that her character has to someone from the Land of Untold Stories , as well as the start of her friendship with Snow White .
That same episode also introduced Cinderella 's stepmother and stepsisters .
David Anders returned this season as Victor Frankenstein .
The character has a connection with Jekyll and Hyde .
On August 15 , it was announced that Jonny Coyne would be reprising his role as Dr. Lydgate from Once Upon a Time in Wonderland , in the fourth episode of the season .
On August 26 , it was announced that Faran Tahir was cast as Captain Nemo , and would have ties to Captain Hook .
On September 22 , it was announced that Tzi Ma would be reprising his role as the Dragon sometime in the season .
Gabrielle Rose would also be returning as David 's mother , Ruth , who appeared via flashback in episode 7 .
On September 27 , it was announced that Sean Maguire would be returning as Robin Hood .
The former main character , who died on - screen near the end of season 5 , will not be brought back from the dead but would appear in a multi - episode arc in a different capacity .
For the second half of the season , Wil Traval would be returning for multiple episodes , starting in episode 11 , as the Sheriff of Nottingham .
On October 31 , it was announced that Mckenna Grace would be returning as a younger version of Emma .
On December 11 , Robert Carlyle revealed that Brandon Spink would be portraying a young Baelfire in episode 13 .
On January 6 , 2017 , it was announced that JoAnna Garcia would be returning as Ariel .
The story line involves a team - up between Ariel , Jasmine , and Hook .
On January 7 , Horowitz confirmed that Gil McKinney would also be returning as Prince Eric .
Two days later , it was announced that Rose McIver would also be coming back as Tinker Bell .
On January 20 , it was revealed that Sara Tomko was cast as Tiger Lily .
The recurring character appears in at least two episodes starting in episode 17 .
On January 23 , Horowitz announced that Patrick Fischler would return as former author Isaac Heller at some point in the second half of the season .
On March 14 , it was announced that episode 18 would introduce the Tin Man , played by Alex Désert , and the Cowardly Lion from the Wizard of Oz tale .
On February 16 , TVLine released casting call descriptions for two characters who appear in the season 6 finale , with potential to continue into season 7 if the show is to be renewed .
One is a man in his late 20s - early 30s who " was once optimistic and hopeful but now is a friendless , cynical recluse " but " still possesses a dormant , deep - seated spark of hope that waits for the right person to reignite it .
" The other is a 10-year - old girl who " comes from a broken home " but " those struggles have only made her stronger — something which will come in handy when darkness threatens everything she holds dear . "
On March 8 , it was announced that Andrew J. West had been cast in the unidentified male role , later revealed in " The Final Battle " as an adult Henry Mills .
On March 9 , it was announced that Alison Fernandez had been cast in the unidentified female role , also revealed to be Henry 's daughter , Lucy .
On May 8 , 2017 , Jennifer Morrison announced that she had declined an offer to remain on the show through season 7 and would not be returning to Once Upon a Time as a series regular in the event the series was renewed by ABC .
However , Morrison noted that she had signed a contract to appear in one episode in season 7 .
On May 12 , 2017 , showrunners Horowitz and Kitsis confirmed that five more cast members , in addition to Morrison , would not be returning to the show for a seventh season : Ginnifer Goodwin , Josh Dallas , Jared Gilmore , Emilie de Ravin , and Rebecca Mader .
In their personal goodbyes to fans , both de Ravin and Mader cited the show 's decision to move forward in a new creative direction as the reason for their departures .
Gilmore expressed similar sentiments .
Meanwhile , Goodwin and Dallas had informed the showrunners a year prior that they intended to leave the show at the end of the sixth season .
RATINGS REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS