LANI PRICE Lani Price is a fictional character from Days of Our Lives , an American soap opera on the NBC network .
Portrayed by Sal Stowers , Lani is introduced as a new police cadet at the Salem Police department and later reveals herself to be the illegitimate daughter of Mayor Abe Carver ( James Reynolds ) .
Lani is very driven and focused on her career .
Lani forms a close bond with her younger half - brother Theo Carver ( Kyler Pettis ) and also falls for Shawn - Douglas Brady ( Brandon Beemer ) who has recently separated from his wife .
She is also instrumental in bringing down Ben Weston ( Robert Scott Wilson ) , the " Necktie Killer .
" Lani leaves town when Shawn - Douglas reunites with his ex - wife .
The character returns to town in December 2016 to visit her father Abe who has recently been shot .
A paranoid Theo ropes her into investigating their father 's new love interest Valerie Grant ( Vanessa A. Williams ) .
She is the love interest of JJ Deveraux ( Casey Moss ) .
STORYLINES
Section::::Storylines .
Lani is introduced as a rookie police officer at the Salem Police Department .
She takes an interest in the mayor , Abe Carver .
She also takes a liking to veteran detective Rafe Hernandez ( Galen Gering ) .
Abe sees pictures on Lani 's computer and realizes she is the daughter of singer Tamara Price ( Marilyn McCoo ) , his ex - flame .
Lani and Rafe attend Salem 's bicentennial celebration together where Abe confronts Lani over his suspicions about her paternity and she confirms that she is his daughter .
Abe makes plans to introduce his autistic son Theo ( Kyler Pettis ) to Lani but wants to ease into it .
Lani forms a connection with Theo when she helps save his friend Joey Johnson ( James Lastovic ) when he collapses during the party .
Lani uncovers that Ben Weston ( Robert Scott Wilson ) is the serial killer who has been terrorizing Salem .
Lani , along with fellow officer JJ Deveraux ( Casey Moss ) tracks Ben to a nearby town where she successfully arrests him .
Theo struggles to accept the revelation that Lani is his sister but when he finally does , Theo becomes very territorial , even around their father .
Theo confides in Lani that he is being bullied but he swears her to secrecy .
Lani continues flirting with Rafe
but she soon recognizes that he is in love with Hope Brady ( Kristian Alfonso ) .
Lani gets a new partner in Hope 's son , Shawn - Douglas Brady ( Brandon Beemer ) which leads to romance .
Lani falls hard for Shawn but before they can consummate their relationship , Shawn reunites with his estranged wife Belle Black ( Martha Madison ) and Lani moves back to Miami .
Lani , now a detective returns to Salem in December 2016 to check up on Abe who is recovering from being shot .
Lani is very grateful to Doctor Valerie Grant ( Vanessa A. Williams ) for saving her father 's life .
However , Theo suspects Valerie is keeping a secret and Lani reluctantly agrees to help him uncover it .
On New Year 's Eve , Lani confronts JJ Deveraux and reveals that she is the woman that he had a one - night stand .
JJ explains that he was blackout drunk and does not remember and they agree to just be friends .
In 2017 , Lani and JJ are paired together on the Orwell case .
They soon start dating despite Abe 's disapproval .
After JJ breaks up with her after her brother 's shooting , she finds JJ and Gabi in bed together , and assumes he has moved on , so she sleeps with Eli which later results in pregnancy .
Later , JJ and Lani get back together after she learns about his attempted suicide and how Gabi stopped him .
She discovers she 's pregnant with Eli 's baby and considers abortion without letting Eli and JJ know , only confiding in Kayla Brady about the child not being JJ 's .
Later , JJ finds out about her pregnancy , thinking the baby is his and convinces her not to abort the child .
She keeps the truth from JJ about the baby not being his , but confesses to Eli about the baby being his after his mother Valerie Grant threatens her to .
DEVELOPMENT CREATION AND CASTING Section::::Development .
Section::::Creation and casting .
The series released the casting call for the contract role in September 2014 , then known as Maya .
The character was due to start filming in late 2014 and expected to air by Spring 2015 .
On June 30 , 2015 , it was announced that model and actress Sal Stowers , known to daytime audiences for portrayal of Cassandra Foster on the short lived online reboot of All My Children would portray Lani .
Stowers was the season 9 of the reality television series America 's Next Top Model .
The actress was slated to make her first appearance in September 2015 .
"
So beyond excited and honored to announce that I have joined the Emmy - winning cast of Days Of Our Lives ! "
Stowers said in celebration of her new gig .
Stowers filmed her first scenes in April 2015 .
On September 2 , 2015 , Stowers confirmed through Twitter that she would debut in the role of Lani on September 25 .
Stowers auditioned opposite Galen Gering and beat out eight other actresses for the role .
Stowers described the ca≠sting process in an interview with Soap Opera Digest .
" It was 6 a.m. and there was this huge adrenaline rush right before the test .
" She was instructed by the casting director Marnie Saitta to do push - ups to help calm her nerves .
Stowers booked the role the same day .
She was still a bit nervous but then the actress told herself , " There was a reason why I got the job . "
She taped three episodes on her first day .
The casting reunited Stowers with her All My Children co - star Robert Scott Wilson .
To celebrate her new gig , Stowers planned a brunch to coincide with her first airshow .
" I love playing Abe 's daughter and being apart of his family " Stowers said of the role .
" I 'm so passionate about Lani " she continued .
CHARACTERIZATION Section::::Characterization .
The original casting notice described the character as " smart and drop - dead gorgeous " African - American woman between the ages of 25 - 30 who was a " confident , dedicated professional " with a " sensitive side . "
According to Stowers , " Lani is very smart .
" She is also " very driven and really good at her job . " Stowers described Lani as having " a power in her . "
Of her character , Stowers said Lani " came with a goal .
" Lani is " very determined .
When she finds out what she wants , she goes after it and wo n't let anything stop her .
" When Stowers was invited back to reprise the role of Lani in 2016 , she actively decided to change the way she portrayed Lani .
" I wanted to approach her differently and bring a boldness to Lani , showing her as strong . "
In addition , the writers wanted to explore the character 's personality more .
Lani is more of a risk taker when she comes back .
According Stowers , Lani has grown so much and " has more of an opinion now . "
Stowers further stated that " Lani owns her power and is committed to her job .
" The actress later explained that " Lani always tries to be Superwoman . " INTRODUCTION ( 2015 ) Section::::Introduction ( 2015 ) .
There was initial speculation that Lani would share connection with Billy Flynn 's character , Chad DiMera .
Upon her introduction , Lani is still settling into her new home "
so we are seeing Lani on her best behavior , " Stowers remarked .
She is also trying to build a relationship with her father Abe whom her mother kept " hidden from Lani her whole life .
" Lani is determined to ingratiate herself into the Salem Police department and " she 's putting everything into her work . "
In the beginning , Stowers said " there was a mystery to Lani . "
As the mayor 's daughter , " Lani kind of walked on eggshells . "
In March 2016 , Daytime Confidential reported that Stowers was one of several cast members released from their contracts when the series once again replaced the writing team .
Stowers had actually filmed her departure scenes at the end of 2015 , only a few months after her onscreen debut .
However , the series kept quiet about her impending departure .
When the news finally broke , Stowers took to Twitter to thank fans for their love and support .
Of Lani 's unexpected departure in June 2016 , Stowers said , " I just went with what was happening . "
RETURN ( 2016 )
Section::::Return ( 2016 ) .
In September 2016 , rumors circulated that Stowers would reprise her role as the actress had appeared in the cast photo for the 13,000th episode back which filmed in July 2016 .
However , Stowers return was not officially confirmed by the network until the week before her first re - appearance on December 19 .
Stowers was hesitant when she was suddenly contacted by the casting director about returning to the role of Lani .
" I was excited but at first , I did n't believe it " the actress explained .
However , Stowers revealed that she expected Lani to come back at some point because of her connection to Abe .
Her return was kept secret so it was just as much a surprise to her co - stars as the actress herself .
However , Stowers was excited because she missed working with everyone .
Stowers said her hiatus helped to develop her as an actress and as a person .
" When I walk onto the set now I 'm very confident in what I 've created with Lani . " She continued , " I 've definitely grown , not only as an artist , but also as a human … Giving Lani a voice , I also gave myself a voice .
That 's not easy to do , especially with a new job .
Stowers was grateful that Lani was much more integrated into the canvas upon her return .
" Everyone respects her .
She 's making great friendships .
I think in the beginning [ … ] , that was n't there . "
Lani comes back to town with a secret .
Though Lani 's main reason for returning is to visit her ailing father , it is revealed that she is the woman JJ Deveraux ( Casey Moss ) had a drunken one - night - stand with whom he could not remember .
In June 2018 , Stowers renewed her deal with the soap ; she will continue to appear as Lani into fall 2019 .
RELATIONSHIPS Section::::Relationships .
Initially , Lani shows an interest in Rafe Hernandez ( Galen Gering ) , a fellow member of the Salem Police Department .
When she realizes he is interested in Hope Brady ( Kristian Alfonso ) , Lani hooks up with Hope 's son Shawn - Douglas Brady ( Brandon Beemer ) when he separates from his wife .
When Shawn reconciles with his wife , Lani skips town .
According to Sal Stowers , Lani " loves love " and she wants it just as much as she wants a career .
However , she needs a partner she can have that with .
Upon her return , the writers pair Lani with JJ , another one of her colleagues .
Stowers liked the pairing " because they 're fun , " she stated .
" They have this very playful chemistry but they also really get each other . "
However , Lani feels the rookie JJ will let their relationship interfere with their work , so she tries to cut him out of things .
This backfires when Lani is abducted by a drug dealer and forced to take drugs .
She experiences withdrawal and at same time questions the future of her relationship with JJ . "
She wonders if this is what he really wants or if it 's just something to get him by .
" Stowers relished in the opportunity to show her acting chops as Lani suffered from withdrawals after ingesting halo . " I spent a lot of time researching what addicts go through during withdrawal .
I did n't know there was fear , loneliness , and hot and cold sensations , feeling like your skin is on fire .
"
Stowers admitted that she had to go a " dark place " but she was up for the challenge .
" I 'm a very positive , happy person , so to put myself in a dark place was scary .
"
Lani is adamant about keeping JJ out of her struggles because " she had something to prove to herself " and JJ .
" She wanted to show JJ that she could hold it together . "
Stowers said it was easy work with Casey Moss and credited her co - star with making her feel comfortable .
At the same time , Lani bonds with Eli Grant ( Lamon Archey ) who helps her hide her withdrawals from everyone including her father and JJ .
While there is a connection between the two , Stowers felt it would be a bit " awkward " due to Abe 's relationship with Eli 's mom Valerie Grant ( Vanessa A. Williams ) .
Eli and Lani initially clash but she admires how good he is at his job .
Stowers was excited to work with Archey again , as they had worked together in their modeling days .
" We 're super - comfortable around each other because we 've known each other for so long . " RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Trey from Rickey.org said of Stowers casting " Looks like
Days of our Lives is about to get some well - needed diversity on their canvas ! "
Jamey Giddens said Stowers ' firing " proves once again that while discussion of diversity are of growing important in primetime and film , daytime is completely regressing in this area . "
Ryan White - Nobles from TVSource Magazine said the lack of development for the character left him unable to feel anything for Lani .
However , he continued , " I will say it 's disappointing that once again , an actress of color remains an afterthought in a genre that once placed a value on showcasing diversity . "
Michael Goldberg from Serial Scoop said " here is hoping that Lani works better as a character this time around than she did last time " and believed Lani 's interactions with JJ Deveraux would benefit the character .
REFERENCES