LIST OF THE SEVEN DEADLY SINS EPISODES
The Seven Deadly Sins ( Nanatsu no Taizai / 七つの大罪 ) is a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Nakaba Suzuki .
The series follows Elizabeth , the third princess of the Kingdom of Liones , who is in search of the Seven Deadly Sins , a group of former Holy Knights who were disbanded after the kingdom was overthrown .
She enlists the help of Meliodas and Hawk , the captain of the Seven Deadly Sins and his talking pet pig , to assemble the remaining members of the Seven Deadly Sins and take back the kingdom from the Holy Knights .
The series debuted on MBS and other Japan News Network stations on October 5 , 2014 .
A second season of the anime series was confirmed on September 27 , 2015 , and aired on January 13 , 2018 .
An original video animation ( OVA ) titled was included with the limited edition of volume 15 of the manga , released on June 17 , 2015 .
A second OVA composed of nine humorous shorts was shipped with the limited edition of the sixteenth volume of the manga , released on August 12 , 2015 .
The first The Seven Deadly Sins anime series was licensed for English release by Netflix as its second exclusive anime , following their acquisition of Knights of Sidonia .
All 24 episodes were released on November 1 , 2015 in both subtitled and English dub formats .
The Signs of Holy War arc of the series , labeled as Season 2 , was added to the service on February 17 , 2017 .
The Revival of the Commandments arc , labeled as Season 3 , was released on October 15 , 2018 in the United States .
EPISODE LIST
THE SEVEN DEADLY SINS
THE SEVEN DEADLY SINS : SIGNS OF HOLY WAR
THE SEVEN DEADLY SINS : REVIVAL OF THE COMMANDMENTS OVAS SONGS Section::::Songs .
The show 's first opening theme song is performed by Ikimono - gakari for the first twelve episodes and the second opening theme is " Seven Deadly Sins " performed by Man with a Mission , while the first ending theme titled " 7-Seven " is a collaboration between Flow and Granrodeo , the second ending theme from episode thirteen onwards is " Season " the major label debut of Alisa Takigawa .
The Seven Deadly Sins : Revival of The Commandments first opening theme song titled " Howling " is a collaboration between Flow and Granrodeo , and first ending theme song is " Beautiful " performed by Anly .
The second opening theme titled " Ame ga Furu kara , Niji ga Deru"(雨が降るから虹が出る ) by Sky Peace and second ending theme titled " Chikai"(誓い ) by Sora Amamiya .
REFERENCES