DADDY 'S HOME 2
Daddy 's Home 2 is a 2017 American Christmas comedy film directed by Sean Anders and written by Anders and John Morris .
A sequel to Daddy 's Home ( 2015 ) , it stars Will Ferrell , Mark Wahlberg , Linda Cardellini , John Cena , with John Lithgow and Mel Gibson .
The plot follows now reformed - fathers Brad and Dusty ( Ferrell and Wahlberg ) , now co - parenting Dusty 's kids , who have to deal with their own fathers ( Lithgow and Gibson ) visiting for the holidays .
Principal photography on the film began in Massachusetts in March 2017 and it was released in the United States by Paramount Pictures on November 10 , 2017 .
Although the film received generally negative reviews from critics , it grossed over $ 180 million worldwide on a $ 70 million budget .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
After finally becoming friends at the end of the first film , Brad Whittaker ( Will Ferrell ) and Dusty Mayron ( Mark Wahlberg ) have a co - dad system where their two children , Megan ( Scarlett Estevez ) and Dylan ( Owen Vaccaro ) , take turns at each father 's house .
Dusty has also remarried , this time to Karen ( Alessandra Ambrosio ) , a writer , and is stepdad to Adrianna ( Didi Costine ) , Karen 's daughter .
Brad and his wife , Sara ( Linda Cardellini ) , along with Dusty and Karen , attend a school play for Megan , where she announces to the whole audience that she does n't like the fact that she has to go back and forth to different houses all the time .
Back at the house , after the play , Brad and Dusty decide to do away with having two separate Christmases and instead do one " together Christmas " .
Dusty , however , finds out his tough fighter pilot / astronaut father Kurt ( Mel Gibson ) is coming for Christmas .
At the airport the next day , Dusty tells Brad that his father is going to make fun of them since he wo n't understand their co - dad arrangement .
When Kurt arrives , he mistakes Brad for a chauffeur .
When Dusty explains that Brad is the stepdad to his children , Kurt does n't like it .
Brad 's overbearing and over - cheerful dad , Don ( John Lithgow ) , arrives next , unnerving Kurt .
Don tells Brad that his mother did n't come along , because she is taking care of Brad 's uncle who is n't feeling well .
Back at the house , Megan and Dylan warmly embrace Don , since he is very present in their lives , while Kurt has n't seen the children since they were toddlers .
Through jealousy of the affection the children show to Don , Kurt rents a large cabin through Airbnb , to house all of them through the holiday week .
As Brad and Dusty pack the bags into the car , Dusty tells Brad that Kurt thinks the two men are harboring bad feelings for each other , but are just hiding it from everyone by pretending to be friends .
When Kurt walks to the car , they change the subject .
Throughout the week , Brad and Dusty 's co - dad relationship is put to the test by Kurt 's meddling .
It is revealed that Kurt has never really had a good father - son relationship with Dusty either .
Dusty gets angry , and Brad tells him to set a good example for his children , and the only person who could ruin the vacation for him was him .
Meanwhile , Dusty tries to get close to his stepdaughter , Adrianna , but she does n't like him and repeatedly tells him that he is n't her father .
Sara also tries to bond with Karen but is taken aback by some of Karen 's actions , like shoplifting clothes from a store .
Dylan develops a crush on a little girl staying in the cabin next door .
Brad gives him some " advice " , and Dusty interjects when he finds out that Brad is having what looks like " the talk " with Dylan , when it had been agreed that Dusty would handle that .
The contradictory mix of advice from Brad , Dusty and Kurt only makes Dylan more afraid .
He gets made fun of by Megan and Adrianna .
Finding the trees too small in a farm , they illegally go on to private property to cut one down .
Brad mistakes a cell tower for a tree , and is electrocuted .
The men bring the cell tower home and use it as a tree , after being charged $ 20,000 in damages for it .
They realise that they forgot Don outside , who collapsed after getting lost while looking for a suitable tree .
The other men find him and save him from a pack of wolves .
While the group tends to Don at the cabin , Don says that he and his wife have been sleeping in separate rooms , but only because of his snoring .
The next day , the entire family goes bowling , and Dylan gets upset after his ball keeps getting stuck in the gutter .
Grandpa Kurt motivates him , and the entire bowling alley cheers as Dylan knocks down a single pin .
After bowling , the family goes out to take the kids to see Santa .
While there , Kurt convinces Dylan to ask Santa for a shotgun , which he agrees to .
Don tells Dylan that a shotgun for hunting means that a poor innocent animal will lose its life .
This convinces Dylan to change his mind , but when it is Megan 's turn to ask for something , she decides she wants to go hunting after hearing Grandpa Kurt saying that women ca n't shoot .
While out hunting the next day , Megan accidentally shoots Kurt in the shoulder , sending him to the hospital .
While Kurt is disabled , she manages to shoot two turkeys , to Kurt 's surprise .
When the day ends , Brad is outside clearing snow .
Sara comes outside and asks about Don 's relationship with Brad 's mom .
Brad is confused and tells her they love each other more than his dad loves him ( and more than he and Sara love each other , a statement that annoys Sara ) .
While he is talking to Sara , his snow plow reels in Christmas lights , which drop onto Dusty 's car .
At the hospital , Dusty and Kurt begin to bond after they almost get into a fight when Kurt tries to leave the hospital .
That night , Brad , Dusty , Don and Kurt go to an improv comedy club , where the four men are relaxing and having a good time watching the show .
Kurt gets up to go get another drink at the bar .
Dusty sees Kurt picking up a woman at the bar and leaving with her , which annoys Dusty .
Brad enters Don into the improv show , and Dusty chooses a topic of a husband confronting his cheating wife as the subject of an improv skit , intentionally pulling at what he feels is a sore spot for Don .
As the skit progresses , it is revealed that Don has separated from his wife in real life .
The audience believes that this is all part of the show , even when Brad tries to tell the audience that it is not .
The next day , Brad confronts Dusty .
Dusty reveals that he chose the infidelity subject for the improv game because he wanted to get back at Brad , because of how Brad has a good relationship with Don .
Inside , Sara comforts Don about his divorce in front of an eggnog bowl .
When they leave , Megan and Adrianna take cups of alcoholic eggnog to drink .
Brad says he knows that is why Dusty chose that particular topic , and to get back at Dusty , Brad has invited Adrianna 's real dad , Roger ( John Cena ) , to the cabin for Christmas .
That evening , the entire family takes part in a Christmas manger representation .
Brad gets into a fight with Dusty because he wants to play Joseph , which Dusty is currently playing .
When Megan begins to swear , and Adrianna falls from being drunk , the crowd breaks up .
Instead of Dusty fighting Brad , he almost comes to blows with Roger , and Don is repeatedly hit with ice - balls .
The next morning , Christmas Day , the families all pack up to leave .
On their way out of town , the families are forced back to town on account of a blizzard .
They are forced to take shelter at a movie theater .
With every other movie being sold out , due to the huge influx of business from other families seeking shelter at the theater , both families go to see the last movie available :
Missile Tow , a fictional holiday action comedy film starring Liam Neeson .
When the power cuts off during the movie , the families go to the lobby where each man confronts their father about the secrets , lies , and attitudes .
Brad confronts Don about not telling him the truth about his divorce , while Dusty tries to talk to Kurt .
When Dylan sees the girl he has a crush on is also there at the theater , he is teased again by Megan and Adrianna .
After remembering some advice given to him by Kurt , Dylan walks toward her to kiss her .
All of a sudden , he does n't kiss her , but instead kisses Adrianna .
Roger gets freaked out and attempts to leave with Adrianna , but is confronted by Dusty .
He deduces that the reason why Adrianna has n't warmed up to him is that he has never told her that he loves her , which he does .
He also tells Roger that loving Adrianna means loving her real father as well since he is also part of the family .
Roger almost leaves without Adrianna , but has a change of heart after everyone breaks out into a song of " Do They Know It 's Christmas ? " and decides to stay .
Don and Brad also reconcile .
Sometime later , at the airport , Don and Kurt are preparing to leave to head back to their respective homes .
Kurt heads with Don up the terminal escalators , where he reveals to Don that he switched out the tickets and they 're going to spend New Year 's in Las Vegas .
As Brad 's mom 's flight arrives , Dusty and Brad discover that Brad 's new stepdad is Chesley " Sully " Sullenberger , the pilot of the " Miracle on the Hudson " flight .
Brad and Dusty remember that they watched the film " Sully " together not too long ago , and Brad appears to be welcoming towards him .
Brad runs down the terminal and says that Sully will never replace his father , because Sully has only one great personal story , whereas his father has a million stories .
CAST * Will Ferrell as Brad Whitaker
* Mark Wahlberg as Dusty Mayron
* Mel Gibson as Kurt Mayron
* John Lithgow as Don Whitaker
* Linda Cardellini as
Sara Whitaker
* John Cena as Roger
* Scarlett Estevez as Megan Mayron
* Owen Vaccaro as Dylan Mayron * Alessandra Ambrosio as Karen Mayron * Didi Costine as Adrianna
* Bill Burr as Jerry
* Chesley Sullenberger as himself
* Liam Neeson as himself PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In April 2016 , the sequel was announced , with Will Ferrell and Mark Wahlberg reprising their roles , Sean Anders and John Morris writing the script , and Anders directing .
In January 2017 , it was reported that Mel Gibson and John Lithgow were being sought to play the main characters ' fathers in the film .
The two were later confirmed to star , along with Linda Cardellini , John Cena , Owen Vaccaro and Scarlett Estevez , reprising their roles .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography began on March 20 , 2017 .
Scenes were filmed in Concord , Massachusetts , Clinton , Massachusetts , Framingham , Massachusetts , Lawrence , Massachusetts and Great Barrington , Massachusetts .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film was released in the United States on November 10 , 2017 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Daddy 's Home 2 was released on Digital HD on February 6 , 2018 , and was released on Blu - ray and DVD on February 20 , 2018 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Daddy 's Home 2 grossed $ 103.8 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 76.6 million in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 180.4 million , against a production budget of $ 69 million .
In the United States and Canada , Daddy 's Home 2 opened alongside Murder on the Orient Express , and was projected to gross around $ 20 million from 3,575 theaters in its opening weekend .
The film made $ 10.7 million on its first day , including $ 1.5 million from Thursday night previews at 2,500 theaters , up from the $ 1.2 million made by the first film .
It went on to debut to $ 29.7 million , finishing second at the box office , behind holdover ( $ 57 million ) .
In its second weekend , the film made $ 14.4 million ( a drop of 51.3 % ) , finishing 4th behind Justice League , Wonder and Thor :
Ragnarok .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 19 % based on 113 reviews , and an average rating of 3.9/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , "
A formulaic comedy that 's unlikely to spread much yuletide merriment , Daddy 's Home 2 can only muster a few stray yuks from its talented cast . "
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 30 out of 100 based on 26 critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A− " on an A+ to F scale .
Alonso Duralde of TheWrap was critical of what he described as the film 's sloppiness and laziness , saying , " Director Sean Anders and his co - writer John Morris execute what are supposed to be the laughs with blunt force .
The jokes announce themselves with heavy footsteps , and almost none of them land , stranding a talented cast with terrible material that they 're straining to sell . "
Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun - Times gave the film 1 out of 4 stars , saying : "
After enduring last week 's lousy and lazy A Bad Moms Christmas , I would have bet it would be many a year before we 'd see another holiday comedy more sour and cynical and profoundly unfunny .
I sit corrected . "
Glenn Kenny of RogerEbert.com gave the film 2.5 out of 4 stars , writing , " I found the sequel better than the original — the writing sharper , the jokes fresher and smarter , the comic interaction between the lead characters consistently engaging .
I mentioned this to my incredulous wife , who said , ' So you 're saying it 's the Godfather , Part 2 of the Daddy 's Home series ' . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Subject !
Result !
Notes !
rowspan="2 " Golden Raspberry Awards !
scope="row " rowspan="3 " Teen Choice Awards SEQUEL Section::::Sequel .
In an interview , Mark Wahlberg mentioned that they would like to get Liam Neeson for the third installment of the film series .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS