WINDOWS SUBSYSTEM
FOR LINUX Windows Subsystem for Linux ( WSL ) is a compatibility layer for running Linux binary executables ( in ELF format ) natively on Windows 10 and Windows Server 2019 .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
WSL provides a Linux - compatible kernel interface developed by Microsoft ( containing no Linux kernel code ) , which can then run a GNU user space on top of it , such as that of Ubuntu , openSUSE , SUSE Linux Enterprise Server , Debian and Kali Linux .
Such a user space might contain a Bash shell and command language , with native GNU / Linux command - line tools ( sed , awk , etc . ) , programming language interpreters ( Ruby , Python , etc . ) , and even graphical applications ( using a X11 server at the host side ) .
INTRODUCTION AND AVAILABILITY Section::::Introduction and availability .
When introduced with the Anniversary Update , only an Ubuntu image was available .
The Fall Creators Update moved the installation process for Linux distributions to the Windows Store , and introduced Fedora and SUSE images .
WSL is available only in 64 bit versions of Windows 10 from version 1607 .
It is also available in Windows Server 2019 .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Microsoft 's first foray into achieving Unix - like compatibility on Windows began with the Microsoft POSIX Subsystem , superseded by Windows Services for UNIX via MKS / Interix , which was eventually deprecated with the release of Windows 8.1 .
The technology behind Windows Subsystem for Linux originated in the unreleased Project Astoria , which enabled some Android applications to run on Windows 10 Mobile .
It was first made available in Windows 10 Insider Preview
build 14316 .
Whereas Microsoft 's previous projects and the third - party Cygwin had focused on creating their own unique Unix - like environments based on the POSIX standard , WSL aims for native Linux compatibility .
Instead of wrapping non - native functionality into Win32 system calls , WSL leverages the NT kernel executive to serve Linux programs as special , isolated minimal processes ( known as " pico - processes " ) attached to kernel - mode " pico - providers " as dedicated system call and exception handlers distinct from that of a vanilla NT process .
Microsoft envisages WSL as " primarily a tool for developers – especially web developers and those who work on or with open source projects " .
WSL uses fewer resources than a fully virtualized machine , the most direct way to run Linux software in a Windows environment , while also allowing users to use Windows apps and Linux tools on the same set of files .
ARCHITECTURE
Section::::Architecture .
LXSS Manager Service is the service in charge of interacting with the subsystem ( through the drivers and ) , and the way how Bash.exe ( not to be confused with the Shells provided by the Linux distributions ) launches the Linux processes , as well as handling the Linux system calls and the binary locks during their execution .
All Linux processes invoked by a particular user go into a " Linux Instance " ( usually , the first invoked process is init ) .
Once all the applications are closed , the instance is closed .
HARDWARE AND FILESYSTEM ACCESS Section::::Hardware and filesystem access .
As there is no hardware emulation / virtualization ( unlike other projects such as coLinux ) , WSL makes direct use of the host file system ( through and ) and some parts of the hardware , such as the network ( web servers for example , can be accessed through the same interfaces and IP addresses configured on the host , and shares the same restrictions on the use of ports that require administrative permissions , or ports already occupied by other applications ) , which guarantees interoperability .
There are certain locations ( such as system folders ) and configurations whose access / modification is restricted , even when running sudo from the shell .
An instance with elevated privileges must be launched in order to get a " real sudo " and allow such access .
LIMITATIONS Section::::Limitations .
This subsystem is not capable of running all Linux software , such as 32-bit binaries , or those that require specific Linux kernel services not implemented in WSL .
Since there is no " real " Linux kernel in WSL , kernel modules , such as device drivers , ca n't be run .
It is possible to run some graphical ( GUI ) applications ( such as Mozilla Firefox ) by installing an X11 server within the Windows ( host ) environment ( such as VcXsrv or Xming ) , although not without caveats , such as the lack of audio support or hardware acceleration ( resulting in poor graphics performance ) .
Support for OpenCL and CUDA is also not being implemented currently , although planned for future releases .
That said , Microsoft explicitly states that WSL is oriented to the development of applications , and not for desktop environment or production servers , recommending the use of virtual machines ( Hyper - V or Kubernetes ) and Azure for those purposes .
BENCHMARKS Section::::Benchmarks .
In benchmarks Windows Subsystem for Linux is often near native Linux Ubuntu , Debian , Intel Clear Linux or other Linux distributions .
I / O is in some tests a bottleneck for WSL .
SCREENSHOTS
SEE ALSO * Azure Sphere
*
AndLinux * CoLinux
* Cygwin
* FreeBSD 's OS compatibility layers
* Halloween documents
* SmartOS types of zones *
Interix
* Wine * Xenix REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Windows Subsystem for Linux blog
* WSL on Microsoft Docs * Windows Command Line Tools For Developers blog