THE DURRELLS
The Durrells ( also known as The Durrells in Corfu on American television ) is a British comedy - drama series based on Gerald Durrell 's three autobiographical books about his family 's four years ( 1935–1939 ) on the Greek Island of Corfu , which began airing on 3 April 2016 .
The series is written by Simon Nye , directed by Steve Barron and Roger Goldby , and produced by Christopher Hall .
The executive producers are Lee Morris and Sally Woodward Gentle .
Lee Durrell , Gerald Durrell 's widow and director of the Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust , acted as consultant .
The series is partly filmed on Corfu and at Ealing Studios in London .
STORY Section::::Story .
The series begins in 1935 , when Louisa Durrell suddenly announces that she and her four children will move from Bournemouth to the Greek island of Corfu .
Her husband has died some years earlier and the family is experiencing financial problems .
A Homeric battle ensues as the family adapts to life on the island which , despite a lack of electricity , proves that Corfu is cheap and an earthly paradise .
A degree of artistic licence is employed : in the TV series , the family move to Corfu together , whereas in real life Lawrence Durrell , the eldest child ( 23 years of age in 1935 ) , had already moved to the island earlier the same year with his wife .
CHARACTERS
Section::::Characters . !
Character ! !
Portrayed by ! !
Series 1 ! !
Series 2 ! !
Series 3 ! !
Duration SERIES OVERVIEW
Section::::Series overview . !
colspan="2"Season ! !
Episodes ! !
Season premiere ! !
Season finale ! !
Average viewership EPISODES SERIES 1 ( 2016 )
SERIES 2 ( 2017 )
SERIES 3 ( 2018 )
Section::::Episodes .
Section::::Series 3 ( 2018 ) .
A third series was confirmed to be in production by writer Simon Nye at the BFI and Radio Times Television Festival on 8 April 2017 .
He described the third series as having " some exotic new animals " , and that production would begin in three weeks ' time , upon Keeley Hawes 's arrival in Corfu for filming .
It is set in 1937 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Reception to the first episode was positive , with Gerard O'Donovan ( The Telegraph ) calling it " a series that 's not only sun - drenched and liberating , but also catches its source material 's high good humour without labouring it and weaves an authentic sense of the innocent exoticism of the original , " before awarding it four stars .
The Daily Mail Christoper Stevens bestowed even more praise , giving it five stars and focusing on the cast 's performance , primarily Keeley Hawes as widowed mother Louisa Durrell and Milo Parker as young Gerry .
The opening episode averaged just under 6.4 million people and was watched by 29 % of the audience over the hour , including those watching on British television network ITV 's +1 channel , and was the biggest drama launch of any channel so far in 2016 and the most - watched show of the day ( including +1 ) .
Following a seven - day catch - up period , the figure aggregated to just under 8.2 million people .
Citing the show as its " best rating new drama of the year and its highest rating new show since September 2014 " , ITV recommissioned the show for a second series on 15 April 2016 .
Over the course of the first series , ratings averaged out at 6.9 million viewers .
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
Internationally , the series was acquired in Australia by the Seven Network and premiered on 24 August 2016 .
In the United States , PBS began airing the show , retitled as The Durrells in Corfu , on 16 October 2016 at 8 pm .
The Durrells started screening in New Zealand on 26 October 2016 on Prime TV .
In Canada , the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation began airing Series 1 on 13 September 2017 .
In Spain , the series has been acquired by the streaming platform Filmin .
The third series of The Durrells was announced by writer Simon Nye at the BFI and Radio Times Television Festival on 8 April 2017 .
It began filming in May 2017 and aired on ITV in the Northern Hemisphere in the spring of 2018 .
A fourth series was announced by ITV on 22 June 2018 , with filming scheduled for later in the year .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Year ! !
Category ! !
Award ! !
Nominee ! !
Result SEE ALSO
* Gerald Durrell 's Corfu trilogy books :
* My Family and Other Animals ( 1956 ) * Birds , Beasts , and Relatives ( 1969 )
* The Garden of the Gods ( 1978 )
* My Family and Other Animals , a 1987 BBC series based on the Corfu trilogy by Durrell
* My Family and Other Animals , a 2005 BBC telemovie based on the 1956 book by Durrell REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS