JAMESTOWN ( TV SERIES )
Jamestown is a 2017 British drama television series , written by Bill Gallagher and produced by Carnival Films , the makers of Downton Abbey .
Set in 1619 , Jamestown follows the first English settlers as they establish a community in the New World .
Among those landing onshore are a group of women destined to be married to the men of Jamestown , including three spirited women from England .
The series premiered on Sky One in the United Kingdom in May 2017 .
Sky ordered a second series of Jamestown in May 2017 , before the premiere of the first series .
Series 2 aired from February 2018 .
The renewal of Jamestown for a third season was announced by Sky One on March 23 , 2018 .
SUMMARY Section::::Summary .
1619 , twelve years after the men have founded the colony of Jamestown , women arrive from England duty bound to marry the men that have paid for their passage .
Among the women are Alice , Verity , and Jocelyn who arrive with little idea of what the future holds or the disruption they are about to bring to the settlement .
The new governor , Sir George Yeardley , and his wife also arrive and discover that running the settlement is not without problems with a company secretary trying to undermine his position .
CAST AND CHARACTERS * Naomi Battrick as Jocelyn Woodbryg – Betrothed to Samuel Castell * Sophie Rundle as Alice Kett –
Farm girl betrothed to Henry Sharrow
* Niamh Walsh as Verity Bridges – Betrothed to Meredith Rutter * Max Beesley as Henry Sharrow – Eldest brother of the three Sharrows .
* Gwilym Lee as Samuel Castell – Company Recorder to the Virginia Company ( Series 1 )
* Jason Flemyng as Sir George Yeardley – Governor of Virginia * Claire Cox as Temperance Yeardley – wife of Governor Yeardley * Dean Lennox Kelly as Meredith Rutter – Owner of the tavern of Jamestown * Shaun Dooley as Rev Michaelmas Whitaker ( Series 1 ) * Stuart Martin as Silas Sharrow – Middle brother of the three Sharrows * Steven Waddington as Redwick – The town
Marshal
* Matt Stokoe as James Read –
Blacksmith / craftsman * Burn Gorman as Nicholas Farlow – Company secretary of the Virginia Company * Luke Roskell as Pepper Sharrow –
Youngest of the three Sharrow brothers .
* Ben Starr as Dr Christopher Priestley * Tony Pitts as Edgar Massinger – Land owner and tobacco grower ( Series 1–2 ) * Patsy Ferran as Mercy Myrtle – Servant girl of Samuel and maid to Jocelyn .
* Kalani Queypo as Chacrow – Native Indian go - between the settlers and Pamunkey Indians * Raoul Max Trujillo as Opechancanough – Chief of the Pamunkey
* Abubakar Salim as Pedro ( Series 2- ) – Angolan warrior who is captured and sold into indentured servitude .
* Abiola Ogunbiyi as Maria ( Series 2- ) – Angolan who is captured and sold into indentured labour .
* Rachel Colwell as Winganuske ( series 2 ) -
Chacrow 's sister married to Henry Sharrow as a gift .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Most of the series was filmed in Hungary .
EPISODES SERIES 1 ( 2017 )
SERIES 2 ( 2018 )
REVIEWS
Section::::Reviews .
The Guardian said the show to be an expensive soap opera , but found the show to be fun .
A critic with the Financial Times questioned the accuracy of the show , especially its portrait of women .
The Irish Times found that everything in the show is " absurd , generic or risible .
"
The Telegraph was kinder to the show , as it found the show to be a " silly but gripping period drama "
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Meet the cast ( Radio Times )