NBA 2K18 NBA 2K18 is a basketball simulation video game developed by Visual Concepts and published by 2 K Sports .
It is the 19th installment in the NBA 2 K franchise , the successor to NBA 2K17 , and the predecessor to NBA 2K19 .
It was released on September 19 , 2017 for Microsoft Windows , Xbox One , PlayStation 4 , Xbox 360 , iOS , Android , PlayStation 3 , and Nintendo Switch .
Pre - ordering gives it on September 15 , 2017 .
Kyrie Irving of the Boston Celtics serves as cover athlete for the regular edition of the game , Shaquille O'Neal is the cover athlete for the special editions , and DeMar DeRozan of the Toronto Raptors is the cover athlete for the game in Canada .
While a member of the Cleveland Cavaliers when selected for the cover , Irving was traded to the Boston Celtics prior to the game 's release .
As a result , a new cover depicting Irving in a Celtics uniform was revealed alongside the original cover .
It is the predecessor to NBA 2K19 .
This was the last installment in the series to be released for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 .
NBA 2K18 , like the previous games in the series , is based on the sport of basketball ; more specifically , it simulates the experience of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) .
Several game modes are present , including the team - managing MyGM and MyLeague modes , which were a considerable emphasis during development , and MyCareer , in which the player creates and plays through the career of their own player .
The game features a licensed soundtrack consisting of 49 songs .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
NBA 2K18 is a basketball simulation game which , like the previous games in the series , strives to realistically depict the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) , as well as present improvements over the previous installments .
The player mainly plays NBA games with real - life or customized players and teams ; games follow the rules and objectives of NBA games .
Several game modes are present and many settings can be customized .
In terms of commentary , Kobe Bryant and Kevin Garnett appear as guest commentators .
Along with the current season 's teams and players , previous games in the series have featured NBA teams from past eras , such as the 1995–96 Chicago Bulls and the 1985–86 Boston Celtics .
NBA 2K18 adds seventeen more such teams , including the 2007–08 Denver Nuggets and the 1998–99 New York Knicks , as well as ' All - Time Teams ' , teams for each franchise consisting of the greatest players in the respective franchise 's history .
A staple of the series , MyCareer , returns as one of the available game modes .
MyCareer is a career mode in which the player creates their own customizable basketball player and plays through their basketball career .
The mode features a storyline which plays out as the player competes in games as well as off - court activities .
The creation tools have been overhauled – new hairstyles and body archetypes are available for the player to make use of , among other things .
The game 's returning MyGM and MyLeague game modes , which task the player with managing all basketball operations for a specific team , were a point of emphasis during development .
MyGM is more focused on realism , whereas MyLeague offers more customization options .
MyGM mode attempts to introduce more cutscene - style interactions than previous games in an attempt to give the mode a storyline , which is dubbed ' The Next Chapter ' , similar to the series ' MyCareer mode .
Additionally , several additions have been made to the mode which caters to the NBA 's latest Collective Bargaining Agreement , and the NBA G League , the NBA 's official minor league basketball organization , is present .
NBA 2K18 again , for the sixth time in the series , features MyTeam mode , a mode based around the idea of building the ultimate basketball team , and maintaining a virtual trading card collection .
Players assemble and play with their team in basketball tournament - style competitions against other players ' teams in several different formats .
Assets for a team are acquired through various means , including randomized card packs and the auction house .
Virtual Currency ( VC ) is used extensively in the mode .
The game introduces a new feature to the series , Neighborhoods , which tie into the game 's MyCareer , MyPark , and ProAm game modes .
In addition to allowing access to the aforementioned modes , Neighborhoods feature an open world design which players can explore while interacting with other players .
Several activities can be completed to raise attributes and the player can purchase items .
The 2 K Sports Pre - game show returned with hosts Ernie Johnson , Shaquille O'Neal and Kenny " The Jet " Smith .
While the in - game main commentators are Kevin Harlan and Greg Anthony with additional voices of Doris Burke , Clark Kellogg , Steve Smith , Chris Webber and Brent Barry .
The sideline reporter is David Aldridge .
SOUNDTRACK
* Mase - Feel
So Good * C + C Music Factory - Gon na Make You Sweat
( Everybody Dance Now )
* Naughty by Nature -
Hip Hop Hooray
* Sammy Hagar - I Ca n't Drive 55
* X Ambassadors - Jungle ( feat .
Jamie N Commons )
* Def Leppard - Pour Some Sugar on Me
* Busta Rhymes - Put Your Hands Where My Eyes Could See
*
Mobb Deep - Shook Ones ( Part II )
*
The Alan Parsons Project - Sirius * Outkast -
So Fresh ,
So Clean * Fitz and The Tantrums - The Walker * Scorpions - The Zoo * Pete Rock & CL Smooth - They Reminisce Over You ( T.R.O.Y. )
* Puff Daddy - Victory ( feat .
The Notorious B.I.G. & Busta Rhymes )
* Souls of Mischief - ' 93
Till Infinity
* Big Gigantic - All Of Me ( feat .
Logic & Rozes )
* Anderson Paak - Am I Wrong - ( feat .
Schoolboy Q )
* The Shelters - Birdwatching * Pitbull - Ca n't Have ( feat .
Steven A. Clark & Ape Drums )
* Future - Comin Out
Strong ( feat .
The Weeknd )
* A Tribe Called Quest - Conrad Tokyo
* THEY .
-
Deep End ( Tarro Remix )
* Lil Uzi Vert - Do What I Want
* Panic !
at the Disco - Do n't Threaten Me with a Good Time * Vintage Lee - HTP * Kendrick Lamar - HUMBLE .
* Eric B. & Rakim - Know the Ledge * Johnny Stephene - Let It Fly
* Cousin Stizz - Living Like Khaled
* Nas - Nas Is Like * Sean Paul - No Lie ( feat .
Dua Lipa )
* Drake - Portland ( feat .
Quavo & Travis Scott )
* Shy Luv - Shock Horror * Onyx - Slam * PnB Rock & A Boogie wit da Hoodie - Stand Back
*
Joey Badass - Victory
* Dame DOLLA - Wasatch Front
* Nas , Dave East , Lin - Manuel Miranda & Aloe Blacc - Wrote My Way
Out
* Linda Lind - Hush
* RL Grime - Aurora * Salmo - 1984
* Take A Mike - 4 Vérités * Shakira - Chantaje ( feat .
Maluma )
* Emis Killa - Cult * GTA & What
So Not - Feel It
( feat .
Tunji Ige )
* Roosevelt - Fever * Rag'n'Bone Man - Human ( feat .
Rudimental )
[ Rudimental Remix ]
* Woodie Smalls - Tokyo Drift
* Double K - U Do n't DEVELOPMENT AND RELEASE Section::::Development and release .
NBA 2K18 was officially confirmed in January 2017 , and was released worldwide on September 19 , 2017 ; players who pre - ordered the game received it on September 15 , 2017 .
It is the first game in the series to be released for the Nintendo Switch ; it was also released for Xbox One , Xbox 360 , PlayStation 4 , PlayStation 3 , and Microsoft Windows .
Kyrie Irving of the Boston Celtics is the cover athlete .
When the game 's cover was revealed , Irving was a member of the Cleveland Cavaliers , but was later traded to the Celtics before the game 's release .
As a result , developer Visual Concepts announced that a revised cover featuring Irving in a Celtics uniform would be released due to the trade .
The special edition versions of the game , which include various physical and digital extras , feature Shaquille O'Neal as the cover athlete .
O'Neal was previously the cover athlete of NBA 2K6 and NBA 2K7 .
In Canada , DeMar DeRozan of the Toronto Raptors is the cover athlete .
Like NBA 2K17 , a free title for PlayStation Network and Xbox Live , called The Prelude , was made available prior to the release of the main game ; in it , the player creates their MyPlayer for use in the main game 's MyCareer mode .
A companion app , titled MyNBA2K18 , for iOS and Android is available alongside the game ; it features Kristaps Porziņģis as its cover athlete .
Like previous games in the series , NBA 2K18 features a licensed soundtrack ; it consists of 49 songs .
The first screenshots of the game were released in July 2017 .
The first gameplay trailer was released on August 8 , 2017 .
The trailer highlights the developers ' attempts to improve the game 's presentation ; player body archetypes and faces have been overhauled and more uniforms and accessories have been scanned into the game .
An extended gameplay trailer was released on August 16 , 2017 .
A trailer for the game 's MyCareer mode was released on August 31 , 2017 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
NBA 2K18 received " generally favorable " reviews for Xbox One and Playstation 4 versions of the game , while the Nintendo Switch version received " mixed or average " reviews from critics , according to review aggregator Metacritic .
In their 8.4/10 review , IGN wrote : " NBA 2K18 impresses by making players behave more like their real - life counterparts than ever before . "
Game Informer gave it a 9/10 , writing , " NBA 2K18 has a few holes in its game – the series needs to improve its writing , the ballyhooed MyCareer Neighborhood hub falls flat , and the tech powering the series is nearing retirement age .
That said , boil the game down to its essentials and you have a rock - solid , well - balanced sports sim that provides an immensely entertaining shoulder - to - shoulder same - couch multiplayer experience . "
Polygon gave the game 7/10 , praising the visuals but criticizing the reliance on microtransactions , saying : " Of course , it 's no surprise that NBA 2K18 looks good ; the series has looked the part since its advent on the Dreamcast , staying relevant visually and staking out its own part of basketball culture .
NBA 2K18 continues the trend , capturing the feel of basketball 's urban centers in The Neighborhood .
It 's too bad , then , that The Neighborhood is covered in ads and persistent microtransaction begging .
The growing push to spend real dollars on VC impacts those looking to build even the most basic of player avatars .
"
Electronic Gaming Monthly gave the game a 6.5/10 , writing : " Maybe NBA 2K18 has been the king of the court for too long and now it 's getting boring .
Instead of improving gameplay , it 's figuring out more ways to make money through MyCareer and MyTeam .
Its new Neighborhood functions as a metaphor for the entire game itself , in that it seems like a big addition to the game
but you quickly realize it 's pretty much just an empty shopping mall and a distraction from the actual game . "
The biggest issue Kotaku brought up was the amount of advertising and time wasted playing the MyCareer .
In older games , the MyCareer was spent in your apartment , shooting around and buying shoes from the comfort of your bed .
But in NBA 2K18 , to perform a simple act such as cutting your hair or changing your shirt , you need to walk a long distance down the street .
In a hub where you can meet other players but not interact with them , NBA 2K18s MyCareer mode falls flat compared to previous years . "
2K18s chances of telling a good story are n't helped by the two wrong feet it sets off on .
Rather than earn your spot in the NBA by playing through a college career , you 're told that you 're playing as someone who quit basketball to pursue a career as a DJ , and who is able to return to the game — and the NBA itself — by playing a few street games in an amateur tournament . "
Kotaku also criticised the games exploitative , egregious microtransaction scheme .
Public reception to the game has been much poorer .
Since its release , it has held overwhelmingly negative reviews on Steam , with many complaints about the large amount of in - game currency ( bought with real - world money ) required to play the game to an enjoyable level .
Similarly , Metacritic scores from players rather than critics show scores below 2/10 for the Xbox One and PS4 versions .
SALES Section::::Sales .
NBA 2K18 topped the sales charts in Australia and New Zealand .
It reached number 2 on the US downloads chart .
The game also reached number 3 in the UK sales charts .
In Japan , it reached number 4 .
It made it to number 10 in the European download chart .
The game became the best - selling sport title of 2017 .
2 K 's parent company , Take - Two Interactive , announced that the game sold 6 million copies just a month after release .
As of August 2018 , the game have sold 10 million copies ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
NBA 2K18 was nominated for " Best Sports / Racing Game " at The Game Awards 2017 , and came in third place for " Best Sports " at the Global Game Awards 2017 .
It won the award for " Best Sports Game " at Game Informers Best of 2017 Awards , and also came in second place for the same category in their Reader 's Choice Best of 2017 Awards .
In their 2017 Sports Game of the Year Awards , it won the awards for " Best Graphics " , " Best Presentation " , " Best GM / Franchise Mode " , " Best New Feature " for The Next Chapter , " Biggest Disappointment " , and " Best Sports Game " .
In addition , the game won the award for " Game , Franchise Sports " at the 17th Annual National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers Awards .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website