TOO CLOSE TO HOME ( TV SERIES )
Too Close to Home is an American television drama series , created , executive produced , written and directed by Tyler Perry that debuted on TLC on August 22 , 2016 .
It is the first scripted series for TLC .
TLC renewed the show for a second season on September 1 , 2016 , which premiered on January 4 , 2017 .
Reruns of the show often aired on the OWN network where all of Tyler Perry 's other shows regularly air .
On November 2 , 2017 , it was confirmed that the show had been cancelled and would not be renewed for a third season .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The series follows a young woman , Anna , from a working class life who , after having an affair with the President of the United States , becomes the center of a political scandal .
When the scandal erupts , she returns to her old life .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN * Danielle Savre as
Annie Belle " Anna " Hayes : A woman who works in the White House , but after her affair with the President is revealed she resorts to a safe place , which is her hometown in Happy , Alabama
* Brock O'Hurn as Brody Allen :
Anna 's former love interest who currently has feelings for Bonnie * Kelly Sullivan as Bonnie Hayes : Anna 's eldest sister , who has natural love for Anna .
She takes care of Anna 's daughter Rebel , Shelby 's son Mac , and her mother Jolene .
She also helps Brody take care of his father , Dr Allen .
She also works at the May Sally 's Diner * Brad Benedict as J.B. :
Brody 's estranged half - brother and Bonnie 's ex - boyfriend .
* Brooke Anne Smith as Michelle " Shelby " Hayes : The youngest Hayes sister , who is a drug and alcohol addict , and who is the mother of Mac * Alpha Trivette as Doctor Allen : Brody 's father who has dementia * Trisha Rae Stahl as Jolene : Anna , Bonnie and Shelby 's mother who is suffering from morbid obesity and hoarding
* Robert Craighead as Sheriff Mobley
* Annie Thrash as Rebel : Anna 's 15-year - old daughter that she left behind to move to DC * Curran Walters as Mac : Shelby 's teenage son who is a similar age to Rebel * Crystle Stewart as Frankie ( season 2 ) : a licensed therapist and the Hayes ' neighbor who knows about Regina and Elm 's affair * Justin Gabriel as Rick ( season 2 ; recurring , season 1 ) :
Shelby 's love interest * Nick Ballard as Dax ( season 2 ; recurring , season 1 ) : Anna 's friend who works with her in the White House * Charles Justo as Victor ( season 2 ; recurring , season 1 ) : Another one of Anna 's friends and Dax 's boyfriend RECURRING * Christian Ochoa as John ( season 1 ) a news reporter * Ashley Love - Mills as Valerie :
Anna 's best friend who also works with her in the White House .
She despite Anna after learning of her affair with the President * Jason Vendryes as Agent Larry ( season 1 ) * Matt Battaglia as President Thomas Christian ( season 2 ; guest , season 1 ) :
Anna 's potential love interest * Heather Locklear as First Lady Katelynn Christian ( season 2 ; guest , season 1 ) * Angela Rigsby as Octavia ( season 2 ; guest , season 1 ) : a next door neighbor of Bonnie who also works with her at the diner
* Azur - De Johnson as Regina ( season 2 ) : Nelson 's wife who has an affair with his best friend , Elm .
* Courtney Burrell as Nelson ( season 2 ) : Octavia 's older brother and Regina 's husband who returns after serving time in the army * Nelson Estevez as Elm ( season 2 ) : Nelson 's friend and Tina 's husband
* K. D. Aubert as Tina ( season 2 ) :
Elm 's wife * James Shanklin as Eli ( season 2 ) : Rebel and Mack 's father .
He has caused trouble with the Hayes sisters .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
It was officially ordered as a series on March 31 , 2016 with an eight - episode order .
On June 21 , 2016 announced that Too Close to Home is Perry 's first series or film with an all - white starring cast , even though the full cast is very diverse .
Danielle Savre was cast as the series ' lead , and Heather Locklear and Matt Battaglia make guest appearances .
SERIES OVERVIEW
Section::::Series overview .
EPISODES
SEASON 1
( 2016 )
SEASON 2 ( 2017 )
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS