WILL ( TV SERIES )
Will is an American drama television series about the ( fictional ) life of William Shakespeare in his early 20s .
The series was ordered for a first season containing 10 episodes , on May 18 , 2016 .
It premiered on TNT on July 10 , 2017 , and concluded on September 4 , 2017 .
It was originally ordered to series at Pivot in 2013 , but was never broadcast .
The series premiered at 9:00pm EST , but after four weeks , was moved to 11:00pm .
On September 5 , 2017 , the series canceled after one season .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Young William Shakespeare is a struggling playwright who tires of making gloves in order to support his wife and three children .
He travels to London and sells one of his plays to a theatre owned by James Burbage .
In doing so , he befriends the rest of the company , pushes out the previous playwright and falls in love with Burbage 's daughter , Alice .
While seeking fame and fortune in London , Will keeps his Catholicism secret from those who would threaten to kill him and exploit his connection to the wanted Robert Southwell .
As he makes a name for himself , he finds that he is saddled with saving a dying theater company and finding a place in a city that is hostile to his religion .
CAST MAIN CAST
* Laurie Davidson as William Shakespeare
* Olivia DeJonge as Alice Burbage * Ewen Bremner as Richard Topcliffe * Mattias Inwood as Richard Burbage * Jamie Campbell Bower as Christopher Marlowe * William Houston as Kemp * Lukas Rolfe as Presto
* Max Bennett as Robert Southwell * Colm Meaney as James Burbage RECURRING CAST
* Nancy Carroll as Ellen Burbage
* Michael Nardone
as Edward Arden * Jamie Beamish as Augustine Phillips * Nicholas Farrell as Francis Walsingham * Nicholas Woodeson as Philip Henslowe
* Henry Lloyd - Hughes as Edward Alleyn * Bruce MacKinnon as Robert Greene * Deirdre Mullins as Anne Shakespeare * James Berkery as Jeremy Knightstand * Zubin Varla as Edward Kelley * Jasmin Savoy Brown as Emilia Bassano * Kenneth Collard as Justice Young
* Leon Annor as Marcus EPISODES RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The series has received mixed - to - positive reviews from critics .
On the review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes , the series has a rating of 61 % , based on 28 reviews , with an average rating of 6.22/10 .
Metacritic , which assigns a rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , reported that there were " generally favorable reviews " for the series , with an average score of 62 based on 27 reviews .
SEE ALSO
* Upstart Crow , a British sitcom about William Shakespeare *
Will Shakespeare ( TV series ) , a 1978 six - part historical drama REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS