GOOGLE DUO Google Duo is a video chat mobile app developed by Google , available on the Android and iOS operating systems .
It was announced at Google 's developer conference on May 18 , 2016 , and began its worldwide release on August 16 , 2016 .
Google Duo lets users make video calls in high definition .
It is optimized for low - bandwidth networks .
End - to - end encryption is enabled by default .
Duo is based on phone numbers , allowing users to call someone from their contact list .
The app automatically switches between Wi - Fi and cellular networks .
A " Knock Knock " feature lets users see a live preview of the caller before answering .
An update in April 2017 lets users worldwide make audio - only calls .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Google Duo was announced at Google 's developer conference on May 18 , 2016 , and began its international rollout on Android and iOS devices starting August 16 , 2016 .
In an email sent to Android phone manufacturers on October 5 , 2016 , Google announced that , starting December 1 , 2016 , Google Duo replaced Hangouts within the suite of Google apps Android phone makers must pre - install on devices , with Hangouts instead becoming an optional app for phone makers to pre - install .
In October 2017 , Google Duo was integrated into Google Phone , Contacts , and Android Messages on the Pixel , Nexus , and Android One phones .
This integration will be brought to other Android phones and carriers in the near future .
FEATURES Section::::Features .
Google Duo video calls are in 720p HD video .
It is optimized for low - bandwidth mobile networks through WebRTC and uses QUIC over UDP .
Optimization is further achieved through the degradation of video quality through monitoring network quality . "
Knock Knock " shows a live preview of the caller before the recipient picks up , which Google says is to " make calls feel more like an invitation rather than an interruption " .
End - to - end encryption is enabled by default .
Duo is based on phone numbers , allowing users to call people from their contact list .
The app automatically switches between Wi - Fi and cellular networks .
In March 2017 , it was announced that Google Duo would let users make audio - only calls .
The feature was first launched in Brazil , with a global rollout in April .
A year later in March 2018 , video and voice messages were added to Duo .
Users can leave messages up to 30 seconds long for contacts who are unavailable .
These messages can then be viewed by the other party , with the option of calling afterwards .
SEE ALSO
* Google Allo
* Google Hangouts
* List of video telecommunication services and product brands REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS