TULLY ( 2018 FILM )
Tully is a 2018 American comedy - drama film directed by Jason Reitman and written by Diablo Cody .
The film stars Charlize Theron , Mackenzie Davis , Mark Duplass , and Ron Livingston , and follows the friendship between a mother of three and her nanny .
It is the fourth collaboration between Reitman and Cody , following Juno ( 2007 ) , Jennifer 's Body ( 2009 ) , and Young Adult ( 2011 ) , the last of which also starred Theron .
The film premiered at the 2018 Sundance Film Festival , and was released in the United States on May 4 , 2018 , by Focus Features .
It received mostly positive reviews from critics , praising Theron and Davis 's performances and the film 's portrayal of parenthood , and at the 76th Golden Globe Awards and at the 24th Critics ' Choice Awards , Theron was nominated for Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy and Best Actress in a Comedy Movie , respectively .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Marlo , a mother of two , is pregnant with an unplanned third child .
Jonah , her son , has a developmental disorder that doctors have been unable to diagnose ; she uses the Wilbarger Protocol to brush his skin in an attempt to reduce his sensitivity .
When Marlo and her husband Drew visit her wealthy brother Craig 's house for dinner , he offers to pay for a night nanny as a baby shower gift , but Marlo rebuffs him .
Marlo gives birth to a daughter she names Mia , and quickly becomes overwhelmed and exhausted .
After Jonah 's principal recommends that he be placed in a different school , Marlo breaks down , and she retrieves the contact information for the night nanny .
That night , Marlo is visited by Tully , the night nanny .
Despite an initial awkwardness , Marlo and Tully develop a close friendship over the course of several nights .
Tully proves to be an exceptional nanny , cleaning the house and baking cupcakes for Jonah 's class .
When Marlo mentions that Drew has a fetish for women in 1950s diner waitress uniforms , Tully puts on a uniform that Marlo had previously purchased and they engage in a threesome with Drew .
One night , Tully arrives to work visibly distressed , and says that she has had a fight with her roommate due to her roommate 's anger over Tully bringing home too many hook - ups .
Tully impulsively suggests going into the city for a drink , to which Marlo reluctantly agrees , and the pair drive to Marlo 's old neighborhood in Bushwick , Brooklyn .
While at a bar , Tully suddenly tells Marlo that she can no longer work for her , explaining that she was only there to " bridge a gap , " and that she feels that she is no longer needed .
While driving home , Marlo falls asleep at the wheel , and swerves the car into a river .
Marlo sees herself trapped underwater , and envisions Tully as a mermaid coming to rescue her .
She awakens at a hospital with Drew .
A staff psychiatrist approaches Drew and informs him that Marlo was suffering from extreme sleep deprivation and exhaustion .
When the doctor asks about their nanny , Drew tells her that he does n't know much about her .
A hospital clerk asks Drew for Marlo 's maiden name , and he provides it : " Tully " .
Tully does not exist ; Marlo imagined her as a means to cope with stress .
Marlo is visited by Tully one last time in her hospital room , where they decide that they have to stop seeing each other , and part amicably .
Marlo returns home , where Jonah tells her that she no longer needs to brush his skin .
She goes to the kitchen to listen to music and prepare the kids ' lunches for the next day .
Drew comes in and shares the music with her as he helps her .
CAST
* Charlize Theron as Marlo Moreau
* Mackenzie Davis as Tully
* Mark Duplass as Craig * Ron Livingston as Drew Moreau PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
As of September 22 , 2016 , Tully had begun filming in Vancouver , British Columbia .
Theron said she gained nearly 50 pounds for the role in a period of three and a half months , and ate around the clock to keep the weight on .
It took her a year and a half to take the weight off after filming had wrapped .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
In May 2017 , Focus Features acquired distribution rights to the film and set the release date for April 20 , 2018 ; however , in March 2018 , the date was pushed back to May 4 .
Tully was released on digital download on July 17 , 2018 , and on Blu - ray and DVD on July 31 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Tully has grossed $ 9.3 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 6.2 million in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 15.6 million .
In the United States and Canada , Tully was released alongside Overboard and Bad Samaritan , and was projected to gross $ 3–4 million from 1,353 theaters in its opening weekend .
It ended up debuting to $ 3.2 million , finishing 6th at the box office , with a lower figure than Reitman 's Labor Day ( $ 5.1 million in 2014 ) .
87 % of its audience was over the age of 25 .
Deadline Hollywood noted an opening of $ 6.5 million would haven been an ideal debut for the film .
It made $ 2.2 million in its second weekend , dropping to 8th .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 86 % based on 233 reviews , and an average rating of 7.7/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Tully delves into the modern parenthood experience with an admirably deft blend of humor and raw honesty , brought to life by an outstanding performance by Charlize Theron . "
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 75 out of 100 , based on 52 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
According to PostTrak , filmgoers gave the film an overall positive score of 73 % , with audience members over the age of 25 giving it a 71 % and those under 25 giving it an 87 % .
David Ehrlich of IndieWire gave the film a " B " , calling it " funnier than Juno and almost as ruthlessly honest as Young Adult " , and saying : " Tully never pulls at your heartstrings quite as hard as it might , but there 's something beautiful about the way these two women both learn to love themselves , and in a way that also makes it easier for them to love each other .
" Writing for Rolling Stone , Peter Travers praised the performances and script , giving the film 3.5 stars out of 4 and saying , " When the film takes a sharp turn and veers off - course in its final third , you hold on because Davis and Theron make sure you do .
Together these two dynamite actresses cut to the soulful core of a movie that turns out to be funny , touching and vital . "
Despite the film receiving positive reviews from critics , maternal mental health advocates criticized it for its portrayal of mental health , which they deemed careless .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS