SICARIO :
DAY OF THE SOLDADO Sicario : Day of the Soldado ( titled Sicario 2 : Soldado in the UK ) is a 2018 American action film directed by the Italian filmmaker Stefano Sollima and written by Taylor Sheridan .
A sequel to 2015 's Sicario , the film features Benicio del Toro , Josh Brolin , and Jeffrey Donovan reprising their roles , with Isabela Moner , Manuel Garcia - Rulfo , and Catherine Keener joining the cast .
The story relates to the drug war at the U.S.-Mexico border and an attempt by the United States government to incite increased conflict among the cartels .
Sicario :
Day of the Soldado was released in the United States on June 29 , 2018 , by Sony Pictures Releasing under its Columbia Pictures label , while it was distributed internationally by Lionsgate .
The film is dedicated to the memory of Jóhann Jóhannsson , the composer of the first film , who died in February 2018 .
It received generally favorable reviews from critics , who called it a " brutal - but - worthy " follow - up to the first film , and praised Brolin and del Toro 's performances , although some disliked the pacing and lack of reason for a sequel .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
A suicide bombing in a Kansas City grocery store kills fifteen people .
The United States government responds by authorizing CIA agent Matt Graver to apply extreme measures to combat Mexican drug cartels , who are suspected of smuggling the terrorists across the border .
Graver and the Department of Defense decide the best option is to instigate a war between the major cartels , and Graver recruits black operative Alejandro Gillick for the mission .
Gillick assassinates a high - profile lawyer of the Matamoros cartel in Mexico City while Graver and his team kidnap Isabel Reyes , the daughter of the kingpin of their rival , in a false flag operation .
Graver , Gillick , and their team take Isabel to Texas and stage a " rescue " with the DEA and local police to make her think she was kidnapped by her father 's enemies .
Gillick bonds with Isabel and the team makes plans to transport her back to Mexico , intending to leave her in territory controlled by her father 's rivals in order to further escalate the conflict .
However , the Mexican police escort for their trip back across the border double - cross them and attack the American vehicles .
Graver and his team kill dozens of Mexican policemen to escape the ambush .
Isabel flees the scene amidst the chaos and Gillick goes after her alone .
Meanwhile , the American government determines that at least two of the suicide bombers in Kansas City were actually domestic terrorists , not foreign nationals , and thus were not smuggled into the United States by the cartels .
In order to quell tensions with Mexico , the Secretary of Defense orders the CIA to abandon the mission and erase all proof of American involvement by having Isabel and Gillick killed as part of the cover - up .
Graver in turn orders Gillick to kill Isabel , but he refuses and turns rogue to keep her alive .
Graver assembles his team to hunt them down in Mexico .
Gillick knows that Isabel will be killed if they stay in Mexico , so they move to enter the United States disguised as undocumented immigrants .
Miguel , a young Mexican - American coyote , recognizes Gillick from a previous encounter in a parking lot in Texas .
He alerts his boss and Gillick and Isabel are captured .
Miguel is forced to execute Gillick .
He shoots Gillick and the gang leaves him for dead .
Miguel is disappointed with the gang and abandons them shortly after .
Graver and his team track down the Mexican gang and Isabel with the help of a GPS transmitter inserted into her shoe , and kill all the gang members .
Graver decides to bring Isabel back to the United States and put her in witness protection rather than following his orders .
Meanwhile , Gillick wakes up finding the bullet went through his cheek , takes one of the gang members ' cars and drives for the border ; killing a couple of criminals after encountering them along the road .
One year later , Gillick has recovered from his injuries .
He locates Miguel and asks him if he wants to be a sicario .
CAST PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In September 2015 , Lionsgate commissioned a sequel to Sicario , centering on Benicio del Toro 's character .
The project was being overseen by writer Taylor Sheridan , with Denis Villeneuve initially involved .
In April 2016 , producers Molly Smith and Trent Luckinbill said Emily Blunt , del Toro and Josh Brolin would return .
By June 1 , 2016 , Italian director Stefano Sollima had been hired to direct what was now titled Soldado from a script by Sheridan .
On October 27 , 2016 , Catherine Keener was cast in the film , which Lionsgate and Black Label Media financed , and which was produced by Thunder Road 's Basil Iwanyk , Black Label 's Molly Smith and Thad and Trent Luckinbill , and Edward McDonnell .
By November 2016 , Blunt was no longer attached .
The following month , Isabel Moner , David Castaneda and Manuel Garcia - Rulfo joined the cast .
Jeffrey Donovan , who returned as Steve Forsing , said that the story would focus on Forsing , Gillick and Graver " going down into Mexico to basically start a war , on purpose , between the rival Mexican cartels , " and described the film as a " stand - alone spin - off " rather than a sequel or prequel .
In January 2017 , Elijah Rodriguez , Matthew Modine and Ian Bohen also joined the cast .
Sheridan said , " if Sicario is a film about the militarization of police and that blending over , this is removing the policing aspect from it . " FILMING Section::::Filming .
Principal photography on the film began in New Mexico on November 8 , 2016 .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Hildur Guðnadóttir composed the score for the film , after collaborating with Jóhann Jóhannsson on the first film as cello soloist .
The soundtrack was released by Varese Sarabande Records .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film was originally set to be released by Lionsgate in the United States , under the title Soldado , but a disagreement between Lionsgate and production company Black Label Media saw the U.S. and Canadian distribution rights change to Columbia Pictures , who then changed the title to Sicario 2 : Soldado ( which is the UK title ) and then thereafter to Sicario : Day of the Soldado , in the North American market .
Columbia Pictures distributed the film in the U.S. , Canada , Latin America and Spain , while Lionsgate distributed it in the UK , as well as handling international rights .
In August 2017 , Sony set the release date for June 29 , 2018 .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
On December 19 , 2017 , the first trailer was released .
The second trailer debuted on March 19 , 2018 , confirming the new title as Sicario : Day of the Soldado .
The film was released outside North America under the title Sicario 2 :
Soldado in some locations , and in Italy , the Philippines and others keeping the initial title of Soldado .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Sicario :
Day of the Soldado has grossed $ 50.1 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 23.9 million in other territories , for a total worldwide gross of $ 74 million .
The studio has stated the production budget was $ 35 million , although Deadline Hollywood reported the film cost as high as $ 45 million before prints and advertising .
In the United States and Canada , Day of the Soldado was released alongside Uncle Drew , and was initially projected to gross around $ 12 million from 3,055 theaters in its opening weekend .
After making $ 7.5 million on its first day ( including $ 2 million from Thursday night previews ) , estimates were raised to $ 19 million .
Its debut was ultimately $ 19.1 million , an improvement over the $ 12.1 million the first film took in during its wide expansion , and third at the box office that weekend , behind and Incredibles 2 .
It fell 61 % in its second weekend , to $ 7.3 million , finishing fifth at the box office .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes , Day of the Soldado holds an approval rating of 63 % based on 233 reviews , with an average rating of 6.3/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Though not as strong as its predecessor , Sicario :
Day of the Soldado succeeds as a stylish , dynamic thriller — even if its amoral machismo makes for grim viewing .
"
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 61 out of 100 , based on 50 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B " on an A+ to F scale , down from the first film 's " A – " .
Varietys Peter Debruge called the film " tense , tough , and shockingly ruthless at times , " and wrote , " Soldado may not be as masterful as Villeneuve 's original , but it sets up a world of possibilities for elaborating on a complex conflict far too rich to be resolved in two hours ' time . "
Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter praised the film as a " worthy , rough - and - tough sequel " , highlighting the direction , lead performances and Sheridan 's script , and saying " Sicario : Day of the Soldado emerges as a dynamic action drama in its own right . "
Darren Franich of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a ' B ' rating , praising the performance of Del Toro while criticizing the plot , stating : " Alejandro ( played by Del Toro ) assassinates a cartel functionary in broad daylight ...
He executes the man , firing his gun exactly 417 times .
So Sicario 2 is junk , but it 's terrifically stylish junk .
Director Stefano Solima has worked in Italian crime thrillers , and he brings a run - and - gun humanity to this , suggesting complexities of border society where the first film defaulted to moody hellscapery " .
Time magazine 's Stephanie Zacharek found the film to be adequate , though lacking the presence of a character in the sequel as emotive as the one played by Emily Blunt in the original , stating : " There 's not a Blunt in sight , though special task force macho men Matt Graver and Alejandro
... return .
This time their job is to stir up a war between rival Mexican drug cartels ; part of the scheme involves kidnapping a drug lord 's scrappy teenage daughter .
Although she has enough teen - beat orneriness to kick both Matt 's and Alejandro 's butts , the movie does n't let her . "
In an opinion piece for NBC News , Ani Bundel called the film " as implausible as it is irresponsible " and criticized the use of negative stereotypes , concluding that the film " is the worst kind of propaganda , in that it probably does n't even realize just how harmful it really is . "
Monica Castillo at IndieWire describes the first film as an unsympathetic portrayal of Mexicans , and compares the sequel to state - sanctioned propaganda , decrying the " xenophobic absurdity " of it .
SEQUEL
Section::::Sequel .
In June 2018 , prior to the release of Soldado , producer Trent Luckinbill stated that a third film is in development .
SEE ALSO * Mexico - United States relations
* Coyote ( person )
* List of films featuring the deaf and hard of hearing REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS