THREE BILLBOARDS OUTSIDE EBBING , MISSOURI Three Billboards
Outside Ebbing , Missouri is a 2017 dark comedy crime - drama film written , directed , and produced by Martin McDonagh and starring Frances McDormand as a woman who rents three billboards to call attention to her daughter 's unsolved rape and murder .
Woody Harrelson , Sam Rockwell , John Hawkes , and Peter Dinklage appear in supporting roles .
It was released in the United States in November 2017 and in the United Kingdom in January 2018 by Fox Searchlight Pictures and grossed $ 159 million worldwide .
At the 90th Academy Awards , Three Billboards Outside Ebbing , Missouri was nominated for seven awards and won Best Actress ( McDormand ) and
Best Supporting Actor ( Rockwell ) .
At the 75th Golden Globe Awards , it won Best Motion Picture – Drama , Best Actress – Drama ( McDormand ) ,
Best Supporting Actor ( Rockwell ) , and Best Screenplay .
It won three SAG Awards , including Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture , and five BAFTA Film Awards , including Best Film and Outstanding British Film .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In the town of Ebbing , Missouri , Mildred Hayes is grieving the rape and murder of her teenage daughter , Angela , seven months earlier .
Angry over the lack of progress in the investigation , Mildred rents three abandoned billboards near her home and posts on them : "
" , " " , and " " The billboards upset the townspeople , including Chief Bill Willoughby and the racist , violent , alcoholic Officer Jason Dixon .
The open secret that Willoughby suffers from terminal pancreatic cancer adds to everyone 's disapproval .
Mildred and her son Robbie are harassed and threatened , but to Robbie 's chagrin , she stays firm about keeping the billboards up .
While Willoughby is sympathetic to Mildred 's frustration , he finds the billboards an unfair attack on his character .
Angered by Mildred 's lack of respect for his authority , Dixon threatens businessman Red Welby , who rented Mildred the billboards , and he arrests her friend and coworker , Denise , on trivial marijuana possession charges .
Mildred is also visited by her abusive ex - husband Charlie , who blames her for their daughter 's death .
Willoughby brings Mildred in for questioning after she drills a hole in her dentist 's thumb when he threatens her .
During the interview , Willoughby coughs up blood .
He leaves the hospital against medical advice and spends an idyllic day with his wife Anne and their two daughters , then commits suicide to spare his family the pain of watching him die of cancer .
He leaves suicide notes for several people , including Mildred , in which he explains that she was not a factor in his suicide and that he secretly paid to keep the billboards up for another month , amused at the trouble this will bring her and hoping that they will keep attention on the murder .
Dixon reacts to the news of Willoughby 's death by assaulting Welby and throwing him out of a window .
This is witnessed by Willoughby 's replacement , Abercrombie , who fires Dixon .
Meanwhile , Mildred is threatened by a crop - haired stranger in her store .
The billboards are destroyed by arson .
Mildred retaliates by tossing Molotov cocktails at the police station , which she believes is unoccupied for the night .
However , Dixon is there to read Willoughby 's letter to him , which advises him to let go of hate and learn to love , as the only way to realize his wish to become a detective .
Dixon escapes with Angela 's case file but suffers severe burns .
Mildred 's acquaintance James witnesses the incident and provides Mildred with an alibi , claiming they were on a date .
Dixon is treated for his burns , and he is temporarily confined in the same hospital room as Welby , to whom he apologizes .
Jerome , who was employed by the advertising company to put Mildred 's messages up on the billboards , gives her the spares that were made in case of mistakes .
She uses them to restore the billboard messages .
Discharged from the hospital , Dixon overhears the man who threatened Mildred bragging in a bar of having raped and killed a girl in the same manner as Mildred 's daughter .
He notes the Idaho license plate number of the man 's vehicle , then provokes a fight by scratching the man 's face .
He then removes a sample of the man 's DNA from under his fingernails .
Meanwhile , Mildred goes on a date with James to thank him for the alibi .
Charlie enters with his 19-year - old girlfriend Penelope , mocks James , and admits to burning the billboards while intoxicated .
James senses that Mildred went out with him out of pity , and leaves angrily .
Mildred tells Charlie to treat Penelope well and leaves .
Though commending him , Abercrombie informs Dixon that the DNA sample does not match DNA found on Angela 's body , and that the man was overseas on military duty nine months before .
Dixon concludes that the man must be guilty of some other rape and murder , and joins Mildred on a trip to Idaho in order to kill him .
On the way , Mildred confesses to Dixon that she set the police station on fire ; he indicates that he knew already .
They express uncertainty about their mission , but agree to decide what to do along the way .
CAST * Frances McDormand as Mildred Hayes * Woody Harrelson as William ' Bill ' Willoughby * Sam Rockwell as Jason Dixon
* Abbie Cornish as Anne Willoughby * Lucas Hedges as Robbie Hayes * Željko Ivanek as Desk Sergeant * Caleb Landry Jones as Red Welby * Clarke Peters as Chief Abercrombie
* Samara Weaving as Penelope * John Hawkes as Charlie Hayes * Peter Dinklage as James * Kerry Condon as Pamela
* Darrell Britt - Gibson as Jerome * Kathryn Newton as Angela Hayes * Brendan Sexton III as Crop - Haired Guy
* Amanda Warren as Denise * Sandy Martin as Mrs. Dixon * Malaya Rivera Drew as Gabriella * Nick Searcy as Father Montgomery * Christopher Berry as Tony
* Jerry Winsett as Geoffrey PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
While traveling through the Southern United States in around 1998 , Martin McDonagh came across a couple of accusatory billboards about an unsolved crime , which he described as " raging and painful and tragic " alleging the murder of a woman in Vidor , Texas .
The billboards highlighted the incompetence of police work and deeply affected McDonagh ; he said that the image " stayed in my mind [ ... ] kept gnawing at me " and presumed that they were put up by the victim 's mother .
This incident , combined with his desire to create strong female characters , inspired him to write the story for Three Billboards
Outside Ebbing , Missouri .
McDonagh discussed the creative process , saying that it took him about ten years to " [ decide ] that it was a mother who had taken these things out .
It all became fiction [ ... ]
based on a couple of actual billboards " .
CASTING AND FILMING Section::::Casting and filming .
The character of Mildred was written with Frances McDormand in mind , and likewise the character of Dixon was written specifically for Sam Rockwell .
McDormand initially felt that she was older than the character as it was written , and suggested that Mildred instead be Angela 's grandmother ; McDonagh disagreed , feeling that it would change the story too much .
McDormand 's husband Joel Coen persuaded her to take the part regardless .
McDormand took inspiration for her character from John Wayne ; and Rockwell , wanting to make his character " the exact opposite " of Mildred , took inspiration for his character in part from Wayne 's co - star in The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance , Lee Marvin .
Principal photography began on May 2 , 2016 , in Sylva , North Carolina , and ran for 33 days .
Allison Outdoor Advertising of Sylva built the actual billboards , which were put in a pasture near Black Mountain , North Carolina because that location was better .
Most of the time the billboards were covered because people in the area found them upsetting .
David Penix of Arden , North Carolina bought the billboards and used the wood for a roof in Douglas Lake in Tennessee , though the messages are no longer in order .
Town Pump Tavern in Black Mountain , which had appeared in The World Made Straight , was used as a set and was closed for three days during filming .
A pool table and booths were added .
The bar 's actual sign appeared in the film .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The musical score was written by Carter Burwell , who had also supplied the score for McDonagh 's films In Bruges and Seven Psychopaths .
As well as Burwell 's score , the film features songs by ABBA , Joan Baez , The Felice Brothers , the Four Tops , Monsters of Folk , and Townes Van Zandt .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Three Billboards
Outside Ebbing , Missouri premiered in competition at the 74th Venice International Film Festival on September 4 , 2017 .
It also had screenings at the 2017 Toronto International Film Festival , the 2017 San Sebastián International Film Festival ( where it won the Audience Award ) , the BFI London Film Festival , and the 2017 .
It was also screened at the Mar del Plata International Film Festival .
In the United States , the film was released , by Fox Searchlight Pictures , on November 10 , 2017 , beginning with a limited release , before " going wide " on December 1 .
The film was released on 4 K Ultra HD , Blu - ray and DVD on February 27 , 2018 .
Six Shooter , McDonagh 's Academy Award - winning short film , is included as a bonus .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Three Billboards
Outside Ebbing , Missouri grossed $ 54.5 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 104.7 million in other countries , for a worldwide total of $ 159.2 million .
In its limited opening weekend , the film made $ 322,168 from four theaters for a per - theater average of $ 80,542 , the fourth best of 2017 .
The film made $ 1.1 million from 53 theaters in its second weekend and $ 4.4 million from 614 in its third , finishing a respective 9th and 10th at the box office .
In the weekend following its four Golden Globe wins the film was added to 712 theaters ( for a total of 1,022 ) and grossed $ 2.3 million , and increase of 226 % from the previous week 's $ 706,188 .
The weekend of January 27 , 2018 , following the announcement of the film 's seven Oscar nominations , it made $ 3.6 million ( an increase of 87 % over the previous week 's $ 1.9 million ) , finishing 13th .
The weekend of March 9–11 , following its two Oscar wins , the film made $ 705,000 , down 45 % from the previous week 's $ 1.3 million .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 92 % based on 340 reviews , and an average rating of 8.5/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Three Billboards Outside Ebbing , Missouri deftly balances black comedy against searing drama – and draws unforgettable performances from its veteran cast along the way . "
On Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating to reviews , the film had a weighted average score of 88 out of 100 , based on 50 critics , indicating " universal acclaim . "
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A – " on an A+ to F scale .
Owen Gleiberman of Variety praised the film 's performances , stating " It 's Mildred 's glowering refusal to back down that defines her , and McDormand brilliantly spotlights the conflicted humanity beneath the stony façade , " and called Rockwell 's performance a " revelation . "
Steve Pond , writing for TheWrap , praised McDonagh 's writing , calling it " Very funny , very violent and surprisingly moving . "
Some criticized the script for McDonagh 's portrayal of small town America .
The New York Times columnist Wesley Morris called McDonagh 's portrayal of rural America a caricature : " a set of postcards from a Martian lured to America by a cable news ticker and by rumors of how easily flattered and provoked we are . "
Tim Parks in The New Yorker praised the " magnificently photographed images " , but wrote that the plot contained " a thousand cheap coincidences " .
He concluded that the film is " empty of emotional intelligence " and " devoid of any remotely honest observation of the society it purports to serve . "
In her review for The New York Times , Manohla Dargis wrote " [ McDonagh 's ] jokes can be uninterestingly glib with tiny , bloodless pricks that are less about challenging the audience than about obscuring the material 's clichés and overriding theatricality . "
The film was also controversial for its handling of racial themes , particularly surrounding the redemptive arc of Officer Dixon .
In The Daily Beast , blogger Ira Madison III called the treatment of Rockwell 's character " altogether offensive ...
McDonagh 's attempts to script the black experience in America are often fumbling and backward and full of outdated tropes . "
Alyssa Rosenberg noted in The Washington Post that " [ Dixon 's ] redemption does n't merely defang his previous venomous bigotry ; it softens Mildred 's character development . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
At the 75th Golden Globe Awards , Three Billboards Outside Ebbing , Missouri won for Best Motion Picture – Drama , Best Actress – Drama ( McDormand ) ,
Best Supporting Actor ( Rockwell ) , and Best Screenplay , and was nominated for Best Director and Best Original Score .
At the 71st British Academy Film Awards , it received nine nominations , including Best Film , Best Director , and Best Actress in a Leading Role ( McDormand ) , and Best Actor in a Supporting Role for both Rockwell and Harrelson .
It won five awards , including Best Film and Outstanding British Film ( making it the only film along with The King 's Speech to win both awards since the latter category was reintroduced in 1992 ) while both McDormand and Rockwell won the Lead Actress and Supporting Actor awards respectively .
It was nominated for four awards at the 24th Screen Actors Guild Awards , winning three , including Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture .
At the 90th Academy Awards it received seven nominations , including Best Picture , Best Actress for Frances McDormand , Best Original Screenplay for Martin McDonagh and two Best Supporting Actor nominations for both Sam Rockwell and Woody Harrelson .
McDormand and Rockwell took home their respective awards .
It was named one of the top 10 films of the year by the American Film Institute .
At the 2017 Toronto International Film Festival , the film won its top prize , the People 's Choice Award .
At the 2017 San Sebastián International Film Festival , it won the Audience Award .
IMPACT
Section::::Impact .
On February 15 , 2018 , Justice4Grenfell , an advocacy group created in response to the Grenfell Tower fire , hired three vans with electronic screens in a protest against perceived inaction in response to the fire .
The vans were driven around London , and displayed messages in the style of the billboards in the film : , , " In response to the Stoneman Douglas High School shooting that took place on February 14 , 2018 , in Parkland , Florida , activist group
Avaaz had three vans circle Florida senator Marco Rubio 's offices displaying , , " On the night of February 15 , 2018 , the movement # OccupyJustice set up three billboards and a number of banners in Malta , marking the four - month anniversary of the murder of the journalist Daphne Caruana Galizia .
The billboards bore the text , , and " The authorities removed the billboards the following day , stating that they were illegal .
The government was criticized for this move , and a day after their removal , activists laid down banners with similar text near Auberge de Castille , the Office of the Prime Minister .
Outside the Bristol city centre on February 3 , 2018 , a mural was erected depicting three billboards reading , , and " .
It was installed by the groups People 's Republic of Stokes Croft and Protect Our NHS in response to the alleged privatization of the National Health Service ( NHS ) and the death of a 15-year - old girl attributed by some to a purported lack of resources by the NHS .
On February 22 , 2018 , the Union of Medical Care and Relief Organizations , protesting the inaction of the UN 's role within the Syrian Civil War , set up three billboards outside the United Nations building in New York that read , , and " .
On or around March 1 , around the time of the 2018 Oscars , three billboards were taken out in Los Angeles , stating " WE ALL KNEW AND STILL NO ARRESTS " , " AND THE OSCAR FOR BIGGEST PEDOPHILE GOES TO ... "
and " NAME NAMES ON STAGE OR SHUT THE HELL UP ! " , as an attempt to protest both the Oscars and the # MeToo movement .
On March 8 , on International Women 's Day , three billboards were put in downtown Pristina , Kosovo , to protest the death of two women as a result of domestic violence .
Both McDormand and McDonagh have responded positively to the protests , with McDonagh saying " You could n't ask for anything more than for an angry film to be adopted by protests , " and McDormand saying she is " thrilled that activists all over the world have been inspired by the set decoration of the three billboards in Martin 's film . "
On March 24 , 2018 , signs inspired by Three Billboards appeared at March for Our Lives gun safety rallies across the US and around the world .
Wang Qishan , China 's vice - president , said that he understood supporters of US president Donald Trump in part through watching the film .
EXPLANATORY NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS