CAN'T STOP THE FEELING !
" Ca n't Stop the Feeling ! "
is a song recorded by American singer - songwriter Justin Timberlake for the soundtrack to the film Trolls ( 2016 ) , for which he served as the executive music producer .
It was written and produced by Timberlake , Max Martin , and Shellback .
Musically , it is an uptempo disco - pop , soul - pop number with funk influences .
The song was released as a single on May 6 , 2016 , six months before the film debuted , and serviced to contemporary hit radio on May 10 , 2016 .
Timberlake gave his first televised performance of " Ca n't Stop the Feeling ! "
during the interval act of the Eurovision Song Contest 2016 grand final .
Directed by Mark Romanek , its music video was released on May 16 , 2016 , and follows Timberlake on a tour to everyday places as he dances through what a typical day may be .
A wide number of fan - made videos followed the song 's video release .
The single debuted atop the US Billboard Hot 100 , opening with 379,000 downloads in its first week , marking Timberlake 's fifth number one single in the country , and making it the twenty - sixth song on the Hot 100 history to start at the summit of the chart .
Additionally , it became the second song to spend its first ten weeks atop the Digital Songs chart .
The single marked his fifth number one single on the Radio Songs chart and his eighth on the Mainstream Top 40 .
It is among the top twenty longest - leading number one singles on the Adult Contemporary chart .
Internationally , it topped the charts in Argentina , Brazil , Belgium , Canada , the Czech Republic , France , Germany , Hungary , Israel , Mexico , the Netherlands , Russia , Scotland , Slovakia , Slovenia , South Africa , Sweden , and Switzerland , and the top five in most of Europe .
" Ca n't Stop the Feeling ! "
was the best - selling song of 2016 in the US .
, it has sold 3.3 million downloads in the country .
For Apple Music it was the second - best - performing song of the year .
The Official Charts Company from the UK named it Timberlake 's biggest song in the country , for over one million units sold .
The song received several awards and nominations , such as its nominations for the Academy Award for Best Original Song at the 89th annual ceremony ( where Timberlake performed the song as the opening number ) , the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song and the Critics ' Choice Award for Best Song , and it won the Grammy Award for Best Song Written for Visual Media .
It is the 41st Hot 100 number one song to be nominated for an Academy Award .
BACKGROUND AND COMPOSITION Section::::Background and composition .
In the early stages of recording his fifth studio album , Timberlake also served as the executive music producer for the soundtrack to the film Trolls .
The uptempo disco - pop track was written and produced by Timberlake , Max Martin and Shellback .
Entertainment Weekly described the song as a " funky mix of disco and pop . "
For The A.V. Club it is a " a soul - pop sugar rush tweaked for maximum dance grooves . "
" Ca n't Stop the Feeling ! " is written in the key of C major with a tempo of 113 beats per minute .
The song follows a chord progression of CAmFAm , and Timberlake 's vocals span two octaves , from E to E.
The track features a " jazzy " , uptempo beat and a falsetto chorus .
" This movie feels like one big , trippy disco experience .
But we did n't have a disco song , " said Timberlake of the Trolls soundtrack .
" We had ' September ' [ by Earth , Wind & Fire ] , but we thought this was a great opportunity to do a modern disco song .
I think that disco is a really underappreciated genre . "
" Ca n't Stop the Feeling !
" appears in the denouement of the movie , conceived with the idea of covering the disco genre inspired by the situation of the final scene .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Writers from Billboard , Rolling Stone , Fuse and USA Today highlighted its attractiveness for the summer season .
Adelle Platon from Billboard called it " delightful " and a " feel - good jam " .
Nate Chinen from The New York Times wrote " Timberlake is on firm footing here , gliding over a disco - pop beat and urging all comers to catch the spirit . "
Jon Niles from Music Times wrote : " The song gives off a feeling of pure joy that only a talent as great as Timberlake could bring to the table . "
For Lisa Respers France of CNN Entertainment , " If Friday had a sound , it would be Justin Timberlake 's " Ca n't Stop the Feeling ! " .
" Ed Masley wrote in AZCentral "
the lyrics sound like they were custom - made to be the soundtrack to your favorite summer memories .
"
For The A.V. Club , Annie Zaleski wrote " a perfect summer song is one I can blast while driving in the car with the windows down .
The tune does n't have to be meaningful — in fact , the more lightweight , the better — and it should offer a few minutes of unadulterated escapism .
This year , I can already tell that " Ca n't Stop The Feeling ! "
is my hot - weather jam . "
The A.V. Club included it among the 40 best songs of 2016 ( first half ) .
Billboard critics ranked " Ca n't Stop the Feeling ! "
at number 33 on their " 100 Best Pop Songs of 2016 " list , adding " the rhythm is eventually gon na get you to dance .
"
Digital Spy considered it the 19th - best pop song of the year , while Idolator named it the 20th - best song of the year , for " feel - good " and " infectious . "
Aversely , contributors for Time and Spin gave it unfavorable reviews , with the latter stating , "
There are certain songs notable not only for their popularity , but for an insufferable repetition . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
" Ca n't Stop the Feeling ! " won the Grammy Award for Best Song Written for Visual Media at the 59th Annual Grammy Awards .
Timberlake received the Hollywood Song Award for " Ca n't Stop the Feeling ! "
at the 2016 Hollywood Film Awards and won the award for Best Song Written for an Animated Film at the 2016 Hollywood Music in Media Awards .
It was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Song , Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song , Critics ' Choice Award for Best Song , Satellite Award for Best Original Song , and by the Guild of Music Supervisors Awards for Best
Song / Recording Created for a Film .
" Ca n't Stop the Feeling ! " won the award for Song of the Year at the 2017 iHeartRadio Music Awards and Favorite Song at the 43rd People 's Choice Awards .
At the former it was also nominated for Best Song from a Movie .
For the 2016 Teen Choice Awards , it received nominations for Choice Summer Song , Choice Party Song and Choice Song from a Movie or TV Show .
It received nominations for Song of the Summer at the 2016 MTV Video Music Awards , for International Song of the Year at the 2016 NRJ Music Awards , and for Favorite Song at the 2017 Kids ' Choice Awards .
The 2016 BBC Music Awards shortlisted it for Song of the Year nominee .
Among other international awards , it was nominated at the Australian APRA Music Awards in the category International Work of the Year , at the Hungarian Music Awards in Modern Pop - Rock Album / Record of the Year , and at the Mexican Telehit Awards in Song of the Year . "
Ca n't Stop The Feeling " was also nominated for the 2017 Radio Disney Music Awards in the categories Song of the Year and Song to Dance to , and at the 2017 MTV Movie & TV Awards for Best Musical Moment .
At the 2017 Billboard Music Awards it won the awards for Top Selling Song and Top Radio Song , and was also nominated for Top Hot 100 Song .
The American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers ( ASCAP ) recognized it as one of the most performed songs of 2016 and 2017 .
It is also nominated for World Soundtrack Award for Best Original Song Written Directly for a Film .
GRAMMY CATEGORY Section::::Grammy category .
Instead of Timberlake 's solo version , the film version of the song was submitted to the general field and visual media category , eventually getting nominated only in the latter and winning .
The Recording Academy changed some rules for the next awards .
Grammy SVP Bill Freimuth explained to Variety : COMMERCIAL PERFORMANCE NORTH AMERICA Section::::Commercial performance .
Section::::North America .
Counting its first three days of airplay , " Ca n't Stop the Feeling ! "
debuted at number 24 on the US Mainstream Top 40 and started at a personal - best number 19 on Adult Top 40 , both for the charts dated May 21 , 2016 . "
Ca n't Stop the Feeling !
" became the first song in the history of Mediabase Top 40 to close the entire Top 40 radio station panel in the first week , being the " most added " song in all 186 of them .
" Ca n't Stop the Feeling !
" became the 26th song to debut at number one on the US Billboard Hot 100 on the chart issue dated May 28 , 2016 , marking Justin Timberlake 's fifth chart - topping single in the country .
The song started at the Hot 100 's summit powered most heavily by its number - one debut on the Digital Songs sales chart ( where it was Timberlake 's sixth leader ) , having sold 379,000 downloads in its first week ( ending May 12 ) , according to Nielsen Music .
Timberlake scored his highest weekly sales total for a song , besting the 315,000-unit start for " Suit & Tie " in 2013 .
It entered Streaming Songs at number six with 15.6 million US streams in its first full week .
On Radio Songs , it ascended from 27 - 9 following its first full week of airplay ( 83 million in audience ) , becoming the first song to reach the Radio Songs top 10 in just two chart weeks since Adele 's " Hello " ( November 14 , 2015 ) .
With " Give It to Me " having last led the Hot 100 dated April 28 , 2007 , Timberlake returned to number one after nine years and one month , the longest span between leaders since Christina Aguilera waited 10 years , two months and one week between " Lady Marmalade " in 2001 and her featured turn on Maroon 5 's " Moves like Jagger " in 2011 .
Among males , it saw Timberlake end the longest break between Hot 100 number ones since Dr. Dre went 12 years , two months and three weeks between " No Diggity " ( by Blackstreet featuring Dr. Dre ) and " Crack a Bottle " , his collaboration with Eminem and 50 Cent .
The song has so far spent 52 weeks on the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming one of a few singles to have spent at least a year on the chart .
" Ca n't Stop the Feeling ! "
reached number one on Radio Songs in just its fifth week , marking the quickest sprint to the top since Adele 's " Hello " needed just four weeks in November 2015 .
Among male artists , the single made the fastest rise to number one on Radio Songs in nearly 25 years , since Michael Jackson 's " Black or White " set the record with a three - week climb in 1991 .
Mariah Carey 's " I 'll Be There " tied the mark in 1992 .
The single also tied Adele 's " Hello " for the fastest - ever rise to the top of the Adult Top 40 .
Among males , " Feeling " bested Pharrell Williams ' eight - week trip to the top with " Happy " , which reached number one in April 2014 , for the quickest climb to the top spot by a solo male artist . " Ca n't Stop the Feeling ! "
also reached the top of the Mainstream Top 40 , where Timberlake passed Bruno Mars for the most number ones among males .
With " Ca n't Stop the Feeling ! "
spending a sixth week atop Digital Songs , it became Timberlake 's longest lead atop the chart , passing " SexyBack " .
Additionally , it marked Timberlake 's best weekly audience for a song with 163 million , passing the 159 million that " Mirrors " drew at its peak .
The following week , it became Timberlake 's first solo number one on Adult Contemporary .
Reaching the AC summit in just its eighth week , " Feeling " completed the fastest run to number one for a ( non - holiday ) song by a male artist in 17 years , since Phil Collins ' " You 'll Be in My Heart " needed only six weeks in 1999 .
Among all songs , " Feeling " made the fastest trip to number one on AC since Adele 's " Hello " : four weeks , in November 2015 .
Timberlake also earned his sixth number - one on Dance Club Songs with " Ca n't Stop the Feeling ! " .
He reached the top of the chart without the aid of officially commissioned remixes .
However , versions from Barry Harris , Fenix and Erick Decks , among others , have helped bring the song to club crowds .
" Ca n't Stop the Feeling ! " became the eighth song to top Digital Songs for at least 10 weeks and the first since Mark Ronson 's " Uptown Funk " led for a record - tying 13 weeks in 2015 ; Flo Rida 's " Low " first set the mark with 13 weeks at number one on Digital Songs in 2007–08 .
"
Feeling " is the second song to spend its first 10 weeks on Digital Songs at number one , joining The Black Eyed Peas ' " Boom Boom Pow " , which logged its first 10 weeks on the chart at the summit in 2009 .
In the US it was the best - selling song of the summer , while being listed at 2 on the Billboard seasonal ranking .
Spotify named it the fifth most - streamed song of the summer globally .
, it has sold 2.495 million downloads in the country , thus being the best - selling song of the year according to Nielsen Music .
It was also the number three most - heard song on US radio in 2016 , with 3.422 billion audience impressions for the year .
It was the number two most - played song in terms of total number of plays , with 587,000 .
" Ca n't Stop the Feeling ! "
is among the top 20 longest - leading number - one singles on the Adult Contemporary chart .
It is also one of only eight singles in the Billboard Hot 100 's 58-year history to spend its first 40 weeks or more in the top 40 .
It reached the top position of the Canadian Hot 100 in its fifth week , after spending its first four weeks at number 2 .
By September 2016 , it has been certified quadruple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) and sextuple platinum by Music Canada .
, the song has accumulated 7.6 million units in the US , combining sales ( 3.3 million downloads ) and equivalent streams .
In 2016 , " Ca n't Stop the Feeling ! " was ranked as the 9th most popular song of the year on the Billboard Hot 100 .
One year after it 's release , " Ca n't Stop the Feeling ! "
finished as the 49th most popular song of the year on the Billboard Hot 100 in 2017 .
EUROPE AND OCEANIA Section::::Europe and Oceania .
" Ca n't Stop the Feeling ! " reached the top spot in Belgium ( Flanders and Wallonia ) , the Czech Republic , France , Germany , Israel , Scotland , Slovakia , Slovenia , Sweden , Switzerland , and the top 5 in Australia , Austria , Denmark , Greece , Hungary , Ireland , Latvia , Lebanon , the Netherlands , New Zealand , Norway , Poland , Portugal , Russia , Spain , and the United Kingdom .
It spent four weeks atop the Euro Digital Songs chart .
The song debuted at number three on the UK Singles Chart , and remained in the number 2 position for four weeks , it later reached the top spot of the UK Singles Sales Chart and spent two weeks as well at the top position .
The Official Charts Company from the UK named it Timberlake 's biggest song in the country with over 1 million units sold , surpassing 2013 's " Mirrors " .
It was ranked 10 on UK year - end chart , while being the 3rd - best - selling song of the year in the territory .
According to Phonographic Performance Limited , it was the most played song on UK radio , TV and in public places during 2016 , while Timberlake was placed fifth .
By March 2017 , it has been certified diamond by the Syndicat National de l'Édition Phonographique and the Polish Society of the Phonographic Industry ( ZVAP ) , decuple platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , septuple platinum by the Swedish Recording Industry Association ( GLF ) , quintuple platinum by the Federazione Industria Musicale Italiana ( FIMI ) , quatruple platinum by the Belgian Entertainment Association ( BEA ) , and triple platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) , and Denmark 's IFPI , and double platinum by the Recorded Music New Zealand ( RMNZ ) .
MUSIC VIDEO Section::::Music video .
The first video released , titled " First Listen " , features cast members from the DreamWorks Animation 's Trolls , among them Anna Kendrick , James Corden , Icona Pop , Gwen Stefani , Ron Funches and Kunal Nayyar .
The song 's official music video was released on May 16 , 2016 .
Helmed by director Mark Romanek , the " Ca n't Stop the Feeling ! "
video follows Timberlake on a tour to everyday places like a laundromat , diner , barbershop and a donut shop , with an individual dancing along to the single at every stop .
All the revelers eventually end up congregating with Timberlake below a highway underpass where they dance together to the song .
As described by Time editor Cady Lang , Timberlake " dances through what a typical day might be : breakfast at the diner and grocery shopping .
" Talking to Entertainment Weekly , director Mark Romanek described the concept as " just the overall feeling of unironic and sincere humanism .
It 's not trying to be cool or slick or ironic .
It 's just fun .
Most of the time , people are excellent .
It 's just a big sugar cookie .
It makes people smile for four minutes . "
He stated the brief dance - off between Timberlake and an inflatable arm waving tube man was inspired by Gene Kelly dancing with Jerry the mouse in Anchors Aweigh .
Bustle writer Amy Mackelden highlighted the scene as the best moment of the video .
Esquire editor Jonathan Evans addressed Timberlake 's monochromatic outfit , writing " the singer nails it by playing with shades of the color [ white ] , plus throwing some pattern and texture in the mix . "
The video received nominations for Best Male Video International at the 2016 MTV Video Music Awards Japan , for Best Music Video at the 2017 iHeartRadio Music Awards , and for Favorite Music Video at the 2017 Nickelodeon Kids ' Choice Awards .
The music video on YouTube has received more than 900 million views .
LIVE PERFORMANCES Section::::Live performances .
On May 9 , 2016 , it was announced Timberlake would perform his song during the interval act of the Eurovision Song Contest 2016 finale , which took place in Stockholm , Sweden on May 14 , 2016 .
This was the first time in the contest 's history whereby a celebrated artist who had never participated in the contest performed .
Timberlake opened the performance singing " Rock Your Body " , soon switching over to " Ca n't Stop the Feeling ! " .
He was joined by a group of backup singers / dancers and a horn section for the song 's televised debut .
The performance was n't aired in the US due to rights issues .
The day before the main show , Timberlake made his first appearance before an audience on night rehearsal to perform both songs .
On February 26 , 2017 , Timberlake opened the 89th Academy Awards with a performance of " Ca n't Stop the Feeling ! " , which included an R&B breakdown and a cover of Bill Withers ' " Lovely Day " at the end .
Timberlake began the performance in the front corridor of the Dolby Theater , dancing his way to the stage with his backup dancers .
The song was also the closing number of his Super Bowl LII halftime show performance .
USAGE IN OTHER MEDIA Section::::Usage in other media .
In June 2016 , Billboard named it the wedding DJs ' fourth most popular party song in the US .
Numerous fan - made videos followed the video 's release , which includes The Memphis Grizzlies , the United States Olympic Committee , citizens of Memphis , Gilbert , graduates of the University of Wisconsin – Milwaukee , among others .
On May 26 , 2016 , Victoria 's Secret Angels released a video in which they lip - synced to " Ca n't Stop the Feeling ! "
Choreographers Celia Rowlson - Hall and Crishon Landers with the help of film producer Mia Lidofsky created a flash mob dance video on October 2 , 2016 in support of the Hillary Clinton presidential campaign , 2016 set to the music of " Ca n't Stop the Feeling ! "
— with all of the dancers wearing pantsuits in reference to Hillary Clinton 's outfit of choice .
They called the event # Pantsuitpower Flashmob for Hillary .
The video was covered in news media including The Washington Post , The Guardian , and Vogue , — and garnered over 2 million views on Facebook .
From New York City , the Pantsuit Power movement then spread to Raleigh , North Carolina on October 23 , 2016 with another flash mob .
The song was also used for an opening video for the 2017 Western Conservative Summit , featuring Republican politicians from Colorado .
An episode of the television series
Speechless features the song .
In Chile , several telenovelas , including El camionero , feature the song as well .
OTHER VERSIONS AND COVERS
Section::::Other versions and covers .
The film version featured in the soundtrack album includes additional vocals from Anna Kendrick , James Corden , Zooey Deschanel and Gwen Stefani .
In June 2016 , American country music group Lady Antebellum covered the song in a live performance in Columbus , Ohio .
Jon Freeman of Rolling Stone commented it " evoked the loose spirit of a jam band unwinding at a summer festival .
" Country performer Hunter Hayes covered the song when he headlined The Paramount in Huntington , New York in June 2017 .
An editor from Digital Journal opined it was " in a clever fashion , which was great deal of fun , both for him and the audience . "
CREDITS AND PERSONNEL LOCATIONS
* Engineered at MXM Studios and Conway Recording Studios in Los Angeles , California and MXM Studios in Stockholm , Sweden
* Recorded ( horns ) at Studio Willow - Valley in Gothenburg , Sweden * Mixed at MixStar Studios in Virginia Beach , Virginia * Mastered at Sterling Sound Studios in New York City PERSONNEL
*
Justin Timberlake – writing , production , percussion * Max Martin – writing , production , background vocals , keyboards , programming , *
Shellback – writing , production , drums , bass , background vocals , keyboards , programming , percussion ,
* Elliot Ives – guitars
* Wojtek Goral –
saxophone , horns arrangement * Janne Bierger – trumpet
* Peter " Noos " Johanson – trombone
* Mattias Bylund – horns , horns arrangement , horns recording and editing
* Noah " Mailbox " Passovoy – engineering *
Samuel Holland – engineering * Serban Ghenea –
mixing * John Hanes – engineering for mix
*
Tom Coyne –
mastering Credits adapted from the liner notes of the CD single of " Ca n't Stop the Feeling " ( RCA Records ) .
CHARTS WEEKLY CHARTS
Section::::Charts .
Section::::Weekly charts . !
Chart ( 2016–17 ) !
Peakposition !
scope="row " Argentina ( Monitor Latino ) ! scope="row " Brazil ( Hot 100 Brasil ) !
scope="row
" Ecuador ( National - Report ) ! scope="row " Finland ( Suomen virallinen latauslista ) ! scope="row " Greece Digital Songs ( Billboard ) ! scope="row " Iceland ( RÚV ) !
scope="row " Latvia ( Latvijas Top 40 ) ! scope="row " Lebanon ( Lebanese Top 20 ) ! scope="row " Mexico ( Monitor Latino ) ! scope="row " Paraguay ( Monitor Latino ) ! scope="row " Philippines ( Philippine Hot 100 ) ! scope="row " Portugal ( AFP ) ! scope="row
" Russia Airplay ( Tophit ) ! scope="row
" Slovenia ( SloTop50 ) ! scope="row " Uruguay ( Monitor Latino ) !
scope="row"Venezuela Anglo ( Record Report ) YEAR - END CHARTS Section::::Year - end charts . ! scope="col
" Chart ( 2016 ) ! scope="col " Position ! scope="row " Argentina ( Monitor Latino ) !
scope="row " Australia ( ARIA ) ! scope="row " Austria ( Ö3 Austria Top 40 ) ! scope="row " Belgium ( Ultratop Flanders ) ! scope="row " Belgium ( Ultratop Wallonia ) ! scope="row " Brazil ( Brasil Hot 100 ) ! scope="row " Canada ( Canadian Hot 100 ) ! scope="row " Denmark ( Tracklisten ) ! scope="row
" France ( SNEP ) ! scope="row " Germany ( Official German Charts ) ! scope="row " Hungary ( Single Top 40 ) ! scope="row " Israel ( Media Forest ) ! scope="row " Italy ( FIMI ) ! scope="row " Japan ( Japan Hot 100 ) ! scope="row " Netherlands ( Single Top 100 ) ! scope="row " New Zealand ( Recorded Music NZ ) ! scope="row " Poland ( ZPAV ) ! scope="row " Slovenia ( SloTop50 ) ! scope="row " Sweden ( Sverigetopplistan ) ! scope="row " Switzerland ( Schweizer Hitparade ) ! scope="row " UK Singles ( Official Charts Company ) ! scope="row " US Billboard Hot 100 ! scope="row " US Adult Contemporary ( Billboard ) ! scope="row " US Adult Top 40
( Billboard ) !
scope="row
" US Dance Club Songs ( Billboard ) ! scope="row " US Mainstream Top 40
( Billboard ) !
scope="col " Chart ( 2017 ) ! scope="col " Position !
scope="row " Argentina ( Monitor Latino ) ! scope="row " Australia ( ARIA ) !
scope="row
" Belgium ( Ultratop Flanders ) ! scope="row " Canada ( Canadian Hot 100 ) ! scope="row " Denmark ( Tracklisten ) ! scope="row " France ( SNEP ) ! scope="row " Hungary ( Rádiós Top 40 ) !
scope="row
" Hungary ( Single Top 40 ) ! scope="row " Israel ( Media Forest ) ! scope="row " Poland ( ZPAV ) ! scope="row " Sweden ( Sverigetopplistan ) !
scope="row
" Switzerland ( Schweizer Hitparade ) ! scope="row " UK Singles ( Official Charts Company ) ! scope="row " US Billboard Hot 100 ! scope="row " US Adult Contemporary ( Billboard ) ! scope="col " Chart ( 2018 ) ! scope="col " Position !
scope="row " Argentina ( Monitor Latino ) CERTIFICATIONS RELEASE HISTORY Section::::Release history .
!
scope="col " Country ! scope="col " Date ! scope="col " Format ! scope="col " Label ! scope="col " ! scope="row " United States !
scope="row " Italy ! scope="row " United States !
scope="row " Germany ! scope="row
" Canada ! scope="row " France !
scope="row " Germany ! scope="row " United Kingdom ! scope="row " United States SEE ALSO * List of artists with the most number ones on the Billboard Mainstream Top 40 chart * List of best - selling singles
* List of best - selling singles in Australia
* List of Billboard Hot 100 number - one singles of 2016
* List of Canadian Hot 100 number - one singles of 2016
* List of number - one hits of 2016 ( France )
* List of number - one hits of 2016 ( Germany )
* List of number - one hits of 2016
( Switzerland ) * List of number - one singles and albums in Sweden
* List of number - one songs of 2016
( Mexico ) * List of number - one singles of 2016 ( South Africa )
* List of number - one dance singles of 2016 ( U.S. )
* List of number - one adult contemporary singles of 2016 ( U.S. )
* List of Ultratop 50 number - one singles of 2016 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS