GLOBE LIFE FIELD
Globe Life Field is a baseball park under construction in Arlington , Texas .
It will serve as the home of the Texas Rangers of Major League Baseball .
Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company , a subsidiary of McKinney , Texas - based Torchmark Corporation , owns the naming rights for the facility through 2048 .
The new ballpark is going to be constructed across the street just south of Globe Life Park .
On May 20 , 2016 , the Rangers announced that they would vacate Globe Life Park in Arlington .
The new stadium will be constructed in a public / private partnership and have a retractable roof .
The ballpark was approved on the following Election Day .
HKS
, Inc. was announced as the architect on January 5 , 2017 .
The Rangers cited weather as the reason attendances at Globe Life Park are lower than in other baseball stadiums in major metropolitan areas , since it is prone to high temperatures and rain delays .
Therefore , the Rangers are proposing their new ballpark be constructed with a roof .
Unlike its predecessors , the new stadium 's center - field will face northeast , instead of southeast .
The preliminary 3D renderings and artwork of the new stadium show the design to be very similar to the looks and layout of Minute Maid Park , the Houston Astros ' stadium .
Final designs have not been unveiled as of August 2017 .
A new shopping mall , as well as a Loews Hotel , and a ballpark village are planned to go along with the new stadium .
The Rangers have also planned to make Globe Life Park in Arlington part of the Texas Live !
complex .
The plans to build the stadium have generated a mixed reaction .
The new stadium will mean a more comfortable environment to watch baseball but will extend existing taxes used to pay for AT&T Stadium .
According to The Dallas Morning News , " The deal calls for the city to issue $ 500 million in bonds to help pay for the stadium .
A half - cent of sales tax , 2 % hotel occupancy tax and 5 % car rental tax would pay off those bonds over an estimated 30 years .
Voters also approved a ticket tax of up to 10 % and parking tax of up to $ 3 at the new stadium .
That money would be used for some of the Rangers ' portion of the debt , which was criticized by the opposition campaign . "
SEE ALSO
* List of Major League Baseball stadiums REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Official Site