RESIDENT EVIL 7 :
BIOHAZARD Resident Evil 7
: Biohazard is a survival horror game developed and published by Capcom , released in January 2017 for Windows , PlayStation 4 , and Xbox One , and in May 2018 for the Nintendo Switch in Japan .
Diverging from the more action - oriented Resident Evil 5 and Resident Evil 6 , Resident Evil 7 returns to the franchise 's survival horror roots , emphasizing exploration .
The player controls Ethan Winters as he searches for his wife in a derelict plantation occupied by a cannibal family , solving puzzles and fighting enemies .
It is the first main series game to use a first - person view .
Resident Evil 7 is the first full - length game to use Capcom 's in - house RE Engine .
The development was led by Koshi Nakanishi , director of the 2012 Nintendo 3DS game .
It was presented as a virtual reality demo , Kitchen , a year prior to its announcement at E3 2016 , and supports the PlayStation VR headset .
Resident Evil 7 was considered a return to form for the series ; critics praised the gameplay , graphics , and design , but criticized the boss battles and the final chapter .
The PlayStation VR version received positive reviews , with some criticism including decreased resolution and physical discomfort .
By March 2018 , the game had sold over five million copies worldwide .
Its initial release was followed by two downloadable scenarios , Not a Hero and End of Zoe .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
The player controls Ethan Winters from a first - person perspective as he searches the Baker house for his missing wife .
Although Ethan is a civilian with few combat skills , he is able to arm himself with a variety of different weapons including handguns , shotguns , flamethrowers , explosives and chainsaws against the Baker family and a humanoid form of fungus known as the " Molded " .
He can also block attacks to reduce damage .
Various sections of the game are spent being pursued by members of the Baker family , who if engaged in combat , can only be temporarily incapacitated .
However , these encounters are avoidable by means of stealth , or running away .
Unlike Resident Evil 5 and Resident Evil 6 , the gameplay emphasizes horror and exploration over action .
The inventory uses a grid - based system with an initial capacity of 12 slots , but may be expanded several times over the course of the game .
An item can occupy up to two spaces , and four items may be assigned to the D - pad .
Item boxes found in save rooms may also be used to manage and store items , and can be retrieved from different item boxes for later use .
Items in the inventory can be used , examined , or combined with other items to increase their usefulness .
Many of the game 's puzzles require that items be examined under certain conditions in order to reveal secrets .
Tape recorders can be used to manually save the game 's progress , which , depending on the given difficulty level , may require the use of a cassette tape .
Videotapes are scattered for Ethan to find , which place the player in the perspective of a different character , often revealing plot information or clues needed to solve a puzzle .
The PlayStation 4 version is playable in virtual reality using the PlayStation VR headset .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 2017 , Ethan Winters is drawn to a derelict plantation in Dulvey , Louisiana , by a message from his wife , Mia , who has been presumed dead for three years .
He finds Mia imprisoned in the basement of a seemingly abandoned house , but she becomes violent and attacks him , forcing him to kill her .
After receiving a call from a woman named Zoe offering assistance , Ethan is attacked by a revived Mia , who cuts his hand off .
Jack , the patriarch of the Baker family , captures Ethan .
After Zoe reattaches his hand , Ethan is held captive by Jack , his wife Marguerite , their son Lucas , and an elderly woman who is using a wheelchair and is in a catatonic state .
Ethan escapes but is pursued around the house by Jack , who has powerful regenerative abilities .
In the basement , Ethan discovers reanimated monsters known as Molded .
Zoe reveals that she is Jack 's daughter , and that the family and Mia are infected , but can be cured with a special serum .
Ethan makes his way to an old house to retrieve the serum ingredients , kills Marguerite , and has visions of a young girl .
Lucas captures Zoe and Mia and forces Ethan to navigate a booby - trapped barn to find them .
Ethan chases away Lucas and frees Zoe and Mia .
Zoe develops two serum doses , but they are attacked by Jack , now heavily mutated ; Ethan kills him using one of the serums .
Ethan must choose to cure either Mia or Zoe .
Choosing Zoe leaves Mia heartbroken , despite Ethan 's promise to send help .
As he and Zoe flee on a boat , Zoe reveals that the Bakers were infected after Mia arrived with a young girl named Eveline when the wreck of a tanker ship washed ashore .
Eveline stops their escape by psychically killing Zoe , and Ethan is knocked from the boat by a creature .
If Ethan chooses Mia , Zoe gives a bitter farewell to him and Mia .
As he and Mia flee on a boat , they come across the crashed tanker , where they are attacked by the creature and knocked from the boat .
Mia searches the wrecked ship for Ethan while experiencing visions of Eveline , who refers to Mia as her mother .
Eventually , Mia 's memory is restored , revealing that she was a covert operative for a corporation that developed Eveline as a bioweapon .
Mia and another agent were to escort Eveline as she was transported aboard the tanker ; Eveline escaped containment , killed Mia 's colleague , and sank the ship .
She infected Mia in an effort to force her to be her mother .
Mia finds Ethan and gives him a vial of Eveline 's genetic material .
If Ethan cured Mia , she resists Eveline 's control long enough to seal Ethan out of the ship ; if he cured Zoe , Mia succumbs to Eveline 's control and attacks Ethan , forcing him to kill her .
Ethan discovers a hidden laboratory inside an abandoned salt mine .
He learns that Eveline is a bio - organic weapon capable of infecting people with a psychotropic mold that gives her control over her victims ' minds , resulting in insanity , mutation , and superhuman regenerative abilities .
Eveline grew up obsessed with having a family , driving her to infect Mia and the Bakers and lure Ethan .
Lucas was immunized against Eveline 's control by her creators , The Connections , in exchange for providing observations on her .
Using the lab equipment and Eveline 's genetic material , Ethan synthesizes a toxin to kill her , and proceeds through tunnels that lead back to the Baker house .
He overcomes Eveline 's hallucinations , and injects Eveline with the toxin .
She reverts to her other form , the elderly woman in a wheelchair ; Eveline has been rapidly aging since escaping .
Eveline mutates into a large monster and , aided by the arrival of a military squad led by Chris Redfield , Ethan kills her .
The squad extracts Ethan ( and Mia if she was cured ) by helicopter branded with the Umbrella Corporation logo .
NOT A HERO Section::::Not a Hero .
BSAA agent Chris Redfield teams up with the now reformed Umbrella Corporation in order to apprehend Lucas Baker and uncover evidence on the mysterious group that created Eveline , called " The Connections " .
After rescuing Ethan Winters and sending him away on a helicopter , Chris proceeds into Lucas ' lab in the salt mine , where he accidentally runs into one of Lucas ' traps and has a bomb attached to his left wrist .
Undeterred , Chris continues his pursuit .
He tries to rescue several captured Umbrella soldiers , but they are killed by Lucas ' traps .
Eventually , Lucas decides to activate a timer on Chris ' bomb .
Chris is forced to freeze the bomb in liquid nitrogen , disabling it long enough for him to remove it .
With the bomb removed , Chris battles his way through more of Lucas ' Molded and traps .
He then finds his way into a secret Connections research lab , where Lucas had killed all of the Connections researchers and plans to betray the organization .
Chris manages to corner and shoot Lucas , which triggers a mutation in his body .
Chris battles and eventually kills the mutated Lucas , and also stops him from transferring all of his data on Eveline to the Connections .
With his mission done and Eveline 's infection contained , Chris returns to the Umbrella base camp for an urgent call .
END OF ZOE Section::::End of Zoe .
Following the path in the main game in which Ethan cures Mia instead of Zoe , Zoe wanders into the swamp and is apparently killed by Eveline ; however , a pair of Umbrella soldiers find her body and discover she is still alive .
They are soon ambushed by Joe Baker , Zoe 's uncle .
Joe initially believes Umbrella is responsible for Zoe 's condition , but a surviving Umbrella soldier claims they have a cure for Zoe stored in a nearby shack .
Joe goes to the shack , finding a partial cure , and returns to find the Umbrella soldier killed by a Molded .
Joe initially flees with Zoe on a boat to find the Umbrella base but is soon forced to search for the base on foot .
A powerful and seemingly unkillable Molded called the " Swamp Man " pursues them along the way .
Joe and Zoe find the Umbrella base abandoned .
They learn that the cure has been moved to a nearby paddle boat .
Joe boards the boat and , after encountering the Swamp Man once again , uncovers a full dose of the cure .
The Swamp Man captures Zoe before Joe can administer the cure .
Joe gives chase into a heavily infected portion of the swamp and finds Zoe in an abandoned church .
Inside , Joe is ambushed by the Swamp Man , who reveals himself to be Jack Baker , Joe 's brother .
Jack knocks Joe unconscious and throws him into the swamp water to die .
Joe eventually washes up near the Baker mansion and finds himself in the midst of a battle between the Molded and Umbrella forces .
He recovers an Umbrella power gauntlet and enters the mansion , where he successfully kills Jack and administers the cure to Zoe just as Umbrella reinforcements arrive , including Chris Redfield .
Chris assures Joe and Zoe that they are there to help , and Zoe is fully cured of her infection .
She then receives a phone call from Ethan , and thanks him for keeping his promise to send help for her .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Following the release of Resident Evil 6 , Capcom conducted internal discussions regarding the direction of the next installment .
A preliminary version of the game , developed in 2013 , featured a more action - oriented gameplay , similar to that of Resident Evil 6 .
Taking inspiration from the 1981 film
The Evil Dead , the developers decided to scale back the game to one location and use a first - person perspective to immerse players and return the series to its roots of survival horror .
Development began around February 2014 .
The game is built on a new engine , named RE Engine , which includes virtual reality ( VR ) development tools .
The decision to make the game first - person was made well before VR was considered ; VR development started in October 2015 , for which a separate team was created .
The introduction of VR demanded that textures be more detailed , discarding flat textures and inaccurate object sizes that had previously been used .
A year before the game 's announcement , Capcom presented to attendants of E3 2015 a first - person horror - themed VR demo , KITCHEN , which ran on the same engine .
While Resident Evil 7 had been in development long before , KITCHEN was seen as an opportunity to evaluate how the RE Engine and its VR capabilities would be received .
As a hint to the demo 's relation to Resident Evil 7 , the logo of KITCHEN had the letter " T " designed so that it resembled a " 7 " , but it went largely unnoticed .
In the company 's Integrated Report of 2015 , the Resident Evil development division of Capcom was stated to focus on creating experiences for the VR market , which included the new VR engine and games for the eighth generation of consoles .
The game was directed by Koshi Nakanishi , who previously helmed , leading a development team numbering at about 120 staff .
For the first time in the series , the narrative designer was a westerner — Richard Pearsey , writer of the two expansion packs of F.E.A.R. and one of the narrative designers of .
At the time of the game 's reveal , development was around 65 % complete .
Some of the creature models in Resident Evil 7 were first created in physical form – a number of them from actual meat – by make - up artists , to then be scanned through the employment of photogrammetry .
This technology developed over half of the general assets of the game , but posed a problem in researching the setting of Louisiana because its considerable demand for equipment made it unviable for transport , which required Capcom to model by hand .
The game 's score was composed by Capcom 's lead composer Akiyuki Morimoto , Miwako Chinone , and Satoshi Hori , with additional contributions from Cris Velasco and Brian D'Oliveira .
Its theme song , an arranged version of the traditional American folk song " Go Tell Aunt Rhody " , was written by Michael A. Levine and performed by Jordan Reyne .
Levine 's step - daughter Mariana Barreto was the original choice , but ended up doing the background vocals .
The song went through about 20 versions until completion .
A soundtrack was released digitally by Sumthing Else Music Works alongside the game on January 24 .
RELEASE AND MARKETING Section::::Release and marketing .
In October 2016 , Capcom launched a 10 part video series called The World of Resident Evil 7 , teasing pieces of the game 's contents .
A cross - save feature between Microsoft Windows and the Xbox One was confirmed in November 2016 .
If bought on either PC through the Windows Store or on the Xbox One digitally , it is playable on both platforms through the Xbox Play
Anywhere program , making it the first game published by a third - party to be a part of the program .
A cloud version for the Nintendo Switch , titled Biohazard 7 :
Resident Evil Cloud Version , was released in Japan on May 24 , 2018 .
Players may access the first 15 minutes of the game for free , and continue playing it afterwards by purchasing a pass allowing unlimited play for 180 days .
The internal marketing team at Capcom collaborated with creative agency iam8bit to produce an escape room called Resident Evil Escape Room Experience , in which groups of six are guided through a series of rooms by Umbrella Corporation employees .
It was held at a gallery space in Echo Park , Los Angeles .
In London , a similar event was hosted in concurrence with the release .
Purchase of a GameStop - exclusive Collector 's Edition included an eight - inch model of the Baker mansion , which when opened functions as a music box playing the main theme rendition of " Go Tell Aunt Rhody " , a mannequin finger - shaped 4 GB USB flash drive contained within a VHS tape box , a SteelBook Case containing the game , a lithograph of the Baker family , and a note .
The UK version added the Survival Pack : Action Set DLC , a 20th anniversary artbook and a seven - inch replica of the mansion , but did not feature the music box .
U.S. pre - orders on the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One came with a code for a free digital download of .
A 4D candle with the scent of the Baker House Mansion was made to enhance the virtual reality experience .
The Gold Edition , released on December 12 , 2017 , includes previously released downloadable content ( DLC ) as well as the upcoming End of Zoe DLC .
Resident Evil 7
: Biohazard was released for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 4 and Xbox One in North America , Europe , Australia and New Zealand on January 24 , 2017 , and in Japan on January 26 .
For the first 12 months of its release , the virtual reality format is exclusive to PlayStation VR .
Over 3,500,000 players have accumulated worldwide , with over 400,000 of them being VR users .
The PC version was tamper - protected by anti - piracy software Denuvo , which was hacked within five days of release .
PLAYABLE DEMONSTRATIONS
Section::::Playable demonstrations .
Shortly after the game 's reveal , a playable teaser named Resident Evil 7 Teaser : Beginning Hour was released on the PlayStation Store .
The demo takes place in a dilapidated house , which the unnamed male player character needs to escape .
Depending on the actions taken by the player , the teaser may have three different outcomes .
Capcom later revealed that the teaser was a standalone experience and not a segment of the game , which has more variety in its environments , and additional mechanics , such as combat .
By July 2016 , the demo had been downloaded over 2 million times .
An update called the " Twilight Version " was released on September 15 , 2016 , and gave access to new rooms and items to find .
Along with the new version , Capcom also released a trailer for the game .
Another update called the " Midnight Version " was released on December 3 , which unlocked additional areas of the house , along with several new items to find and a puzzle concerning a riddle in the Twilight Version .
The demo was released for Xbox One on December 9 and for PC on December 19 .
A playable demo called Lantern was made available for attendees at Gamescom 2016 , as part of revealing the first Resident Evil 7 story trailer .
It makes use of found footage and first - person narrative as it tells the story of a young woman by the name of Mia hiding from an agitated old lady holding a lantern .
The old lady is Marguerite Baker , who was first mentioned in Beginning Hour .
DOWNLOADABLE CONTENT Section::::Downloadable content .
The first downloadable content package for the game , Banned Footage Vol . 1 , was released for the PlayStation 4 on January 31 , 2017 .
Banned Footage Vol .
1 includes two scenarios , called " Nightmare " and " Bedroom " , and a new game mode , " Ethan Must Die " .
On February 14 , Banned Footage Vol .
2 was released for the PlayStation 4 , which includes two additional scenarios , called " 21 " and " Daughters " , and a new game mode , " Jack 's 55th Birthday " .
Banned Footage Vol .
1 and Banned Footage Vol .
2 were released for the Xbox One and PC on February 21 .
Not a Hero – a story chapter where players control Chris Redfield , which was delayed from its Q2 2017 release date , was released for free , on December 12 , 2017 , along with a new DLC called End of Zoe , that came out the same day .
While End of Zoe was developed by Capcom , development duties for Not a Hero were outsourced to HexaDrive .
RECEPTION PRE - RELEASE Section::::Reception . Section::::Pre - release .
Due to its first - person presentation , the game has drawn comparisons to Konami 's cancelled Silent Hills game and its P.T. demo .
Capcom responded to this by pointing out that Resident Evil 7 was in development long before the reveal of P.T. , and dispelled any rumors about staff of P.T. having been hired to work on the game .
Shacknews noted that Beginning Hour had several similarities with Sweet Home ( 1989 ) , the Capcom horror game that inspired the original Resident Evil ( 1996 ) .
These similarities to Sweet Home include the plot of a film crew going to an abandoned house , a paranormal female presence in the house , and a tragic tale involving a family that once lived there .
Eurogamer found the element of survival horror in Lantern reminiscent of .
Resident Evil 7 was well received for the dissimilarity to its polarizing predecessor , in particular the change from action - oriented combat and effects to an approach more grounded in horror .
POST - RELEASE Section::::Post - release .
The game received generally favorable reviews according to Metacritic .
Resident Evil 7 was included in numbered lists of the best video games in 2017 :
5th place for " Best Horror Game " and 6th place in the 25 Best Games list at GamesRadar+ and 5th place at Business Insider .
Vulture.com also listed the game among the best video games of the year .
PlayStation Official Magazine – UK listed it as the fourth best PlayStation VR game .
Entertainment Weekly ranked the game third on their list of the " Best Games of 2017 " , Polygon ranked it fifth on their list of the 50 best games of 2017 , and EGMNow ranked it seventh on their list of the 25 Best Games of 2017 , while Eurogamer ranked it 14th on their list of the " Top 50 Games of 2017 " .
Ben " Yahtzee " Croshaw of The Escapist listed it as his favorite game of 2017 , and The Verge named it as one of their 15 Best Games of 2017 .
In Game Informers Reader 's Choice Best of 2017
Awards , the game came in the lead for " Best VR Game " , also giving it the award for " Best VR Action " in their 2017 Action Game of the Year Awards .
Destructoids Zack Furniss felt that the primary accomplishment of Resident Evil 7 concerned its pacing , which was praised as " masterful " .
Furniss ' apprehensive expectations of how the story would unfold were subverted to his liking , deeming the result a blend similar to the horror and comedy found in The Evil Dead films .
He found a sense of finality in the combat and lauded it for having produced lasting tension .
What held more sway , however , was the priority of survival horror , with the management of limited resources meeting a positive response .
Furniss considered the boss fights to be " harrowing " and welcomed the consistent surreality of the game .
His playthrough with the PlayStation VR inspired unease , unpredictable jump scares and ultimately an " intuitive " experience .
Ray Carsillo of EGMNow favored the atmosphere 's constant mood of anxiety , which was partly impacted by the interiors of the main setting .
The sound design was also thought to complement this sense of dread , increasing the level of player involvement .
He noted the slow narrative build as the game 's most substantial achievement , and likened its efficacy to that of earlier games in the series .
Like Furniss , Carsillo expressed appreciation for the pacing , and opined that it brought considerable intrigue , accommodating lengthy play sessions .
Playing with the virtual reality headset was " even more frightening than doing it normally " , according to Carsillo , echoing Furniss ' view that it made the game more immersive .
Writing for Game Informer , Andrew Reiner commended the " tense , unsettling , overly gory " atmosphere for providing a competent introduction to Resident Evil 7 .
The Baker house and the nature of exploring it posed significant interest to him , for together , they would present new aspects regarding the occupants and be enhanced by the first - person perspective .
Scott Butterworth at GameSpot enjoyed the narrative overall , valuing its memorable moments and the thematic consistency of the writing .
He was impressed with the reliance of atmosphere as opposed to jump scares to heighten the feeling of danger .
Using the Baker family to multifarious ends of gameplay was complimented as a logical extension of the established world ; the interactive VHS tapes were approved of for the same reason , said to serve " beautifully as both a narrative device and a way to break up Ethan 's exhausting mission " .
On PlayStation VR , Butterworth mentioned that , in its employment , the element of horror appeared more realistic .
Leon Hurley , writing for GamesRadar+ , was of the opinion that , while the " gore and guts " were sparingly effective , a number of his most favorite moments had to do with investigating the " beautifully designed " Baker house .
As for the VR , it was dubbed as a terrifying experience " where the mildewy atmosphere gets into your soul " .
Giant Bombs Dan Ryckert referred to Resident Evil 7 as the reinvigoration of earlier components in the series while at the same time yielding a fresh outlook with a yet - unrivaled story .
The main antagonists bore substantial weight to Ryckert 's cause for worry , and gave way to thrills when prompted to flee them .
He viewed the first - person perspective as " bold " , and attributed to the PlayStation VR , an earnest addition to the " scare factor " .
Chloi Rad of IGN endorsed the pervading tone of eeriness in the game , owed entirely to the plantation , which she thought was " one of the creepiest single settings since the Spencer Mansion " .
Also , she observed that the game world gave off a robust sense of place with unwavering exploration .
To her , the Baker family were the most compelling of the characters because of the consequent emotional strain felt in their presence .
Andy Kelly at PC Gamer began his review , writing , " It 's a return to the atmospheric , slow - burning horror of the original " .
He disagreed with Ryckert 's assessment that the first - person was a bold reinvention , instead praising it for being " classic Resident Evil through and through " .
Kelly saw the regular state of vulnerability he was faced within the game as one of its greatest strengths , giving credit to the visuals and audio for adding to the " rumbling sense of dread " .
He considered flashbacks via VHS tapes to be one of his favorite features .
Polygons Philip Kollar applauded Resident Evil 7s return to form , declaring that " no Resident Evil game since the first has done as good a job as RE7 at making me feel scared and helpless " .
Conversely , Furniss observed the boss fight and ending as disappointing .
He also cited issues with the PlayStation VR , including the prospect of sacrificing graphics for improved aim and immersion , as the resolution would decrease while in virtual reality .
Carsillo disliked the inventory system because its restricted capacity left weaponry and ammunition with the same amount of space as other items critical to story progression .
The lack of character development for the protagonist Ethan Winters was disparaged as well , with Reiner stating that the plot suffered flaws of inconsistency from this approach .
Also subject to criticism was the required body movements while in seated VR mode , which were described as stomach - churning .
Butterworth felt a loss of excitement by the end , blaming the repetition of certain assignments to be carried out .
He faulted enemies for exerting less of a threat than was preferred in the given difficulty level .
Unlike with other platforms , Butterworth detected inferior visual performance on the Xbox One with degraded colors and textures .
Hurley expressed disapproval of the decision one comes across near the end of the game , calling into question its relevance by arguing that it could be quickly resolved in the event of regret .
Rad criticized Resident Evil 7 for its dependence on " overplayed tropes about rural America " which would eventually resemble a cartoon , and the puzzles were appraised as the sole shortcoming of the setting .
Kollar accused boss battles of interrupting the inherent suspense .
The game won the Gold Prize , User 's Choice Prizes , and the PlayStation VR Special Award at the PlayStation Awards .
It was also nominated for " Best Setting " in PC Gamers 2017 Game of the Year Awards , and won the award for " Best VR Game " in Destructoids Game of the Year Awards 2017 .
It also won the People 's Choice Award for " Best VR Experience " for which it was a runner - up in IGNs
Best of 2017
Awards ; its other nominations were for " Best Xbox One Game " , " Best PlayStation 4 Game " , " Best Action / Adventure Game " , and " Best Graphics " .
SALES Section::::Sales .
Capcom 's pre - release sales projection for the game 's launch window , through the end of March 2017 , was 4 million copies .
The game had shipped over 2.5 million units worldwide days after the release , while the demo exceeded 7.15 million downloads .
The modest shipment figure had an effect on Capcom 's stock price , which fell more than three percent following the Tokyo Stock Exchange .
It was the best - selling video game in the UK during its week of release according to Chart - Track , amounting to the third - best debut in Resident Evil history behind 5 ( 7.1 mill ) and 6 ( 6.6 mill ) .
200,000 copies had also been sold through Steam during that time .
It ranked first in the Japanese charts for the week ending January 29 ; the PS4 sales totalled 187,306 copies , 58.9 percent of its initial shipment .
In the month of January in the United States , Resident Evil 7 sold the most out of any video game .
On February 1 , Capcom communicated to its investors that the game had recouped its budget .
It remained at the top of the UK sales chart in its second week .
February saw Resident Evil 7 ranked the second best - selling video game in the United States , behind For Honor .
By April 2017 , Resident Evil 7 had sold 3.5 million copies worldwide , short of Capcom 's expectation of 4 million .
In May 2017 , Capcom gave the game a lifetime sales forecast of ten million units , citing favorable reviews , marketing and downloadable content as contributing factors .
By September 2018 , total sales reached 5.7 million copies .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Year ! !
Award ! !
Category ! !
Result ! !
Ref SEQUEL
Section::::Sequel .
On September 14 , 2017 , Capcom announced that a new Resident Evil was " already in motion " .
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS