THE ONE AND ONLY IVAN ( FILM )
The One and Only Ivan is an American fantasy film based on the children 's novel of the same name and directed by Thea Sharrock .
The screenplay was written by Mike White and Sam Rockwell stars as the voice of the titular Ivan .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
A gorilla named Ivan lives in a cage at the Exit 8 Big Top Mall and Video Arcade with an aging elephant named Stella and a dog named Bob with no recollection of how they got there .
They are owned by Mack who is the owner of Big Top Mall .
When an abused baby elephant named Ruby shows up and is taken under Stella 's trunk , Ivan starts to care for her as well and along with the janitor 's daughter Julia , they help to turn things around at the mall .
CAST
* Bryan Cranston as Mack , owner of the Big Top Mall * Ariana Greenblatt as Julia , George 's daughter * Ramon Rodriguez as George , Julia 's father and a custodian at the Big Top Mall
*
Indira Varma
* Eleanor Matsuura VOICES
* Sam Rockwell as Ivan , a gorilla * Brooklynn Prince as Ruby , an elephant * Angelina Jolie as Stella , an elephant * Danny DeVito as Bob , a dog
* Helen Mirren PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
On April 9 , 2014 , it was announced that Walt Disney Pictures may adapt the book with Allison Shearmur to produce .
On May 6 , 2016 , it was announced that Mike Newell would direct with a script from Mike White .
In March 2017 , Thea Sharrock entered negotiations to direct the film after Newell left the project .
In October 2017 , it was reported that Angelina Jolie had been cast to voice an elephant named Stella .
In November , Brooklynn Prince was cast to voice Ruby , the baby elephant .
In January 2018 , Ariana Greenblatt joined the cast in a live action role .
Producer Allison Shearmur died on January 19 , 2018 .
She will retain her producer credit on the film .
In February , Sam Rockwell was cast to voice the titular Ivan , and Bryan Cranston was cast as a circus owner .
In March 2018 , Ramon Rodriguez signed on to a live action role , that of the father of Greenblatt 's character .
In May 2018 , Danny DeVito and Helen Mirren signed on to voice characters in the film , while Indira Varma and Eleanor Matsuura will appear in live action roles .
Principal production commenced on April 30 , 2018 in Lakeland , Florida .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* The One and Only Ivan at the Internet Movie Database