MRS .
COLUMBO Mrs. Columbo , later known as Kate Columbo , followed by Kate the Detective and then ultimately Kate Loves a Mystery is an American crime drama television series initially based on the wife of Lieutenant Columbo , the title character from the television series Columbo .
It was created and produced by Richard Alan Simmons and Universal Television for NBC , and stars Kate Mulgrew as a news reporter helping to solve crimes while raising her daughter .
The series debuted in February 1979 as a spin - off to the successful mystery crime drama series Columbo , focusing on Lieutenant Columbo 's wife , who is never given a first name in the original Columbo series but was named Kate in this series .
After poor ratings and reception from both audiences and the original producers of Columbo , both the series and the eponymous character herself were renamed in an attempt to change direction , but this did not help ratings and the series was ultimately canceled in March 1980 after 13 episodes had aired .
Neither Peter Falk nor the character of Lieutenant Columbo ever appeared on or endorsed the show .
SERIES OVERVIEW
Section::::Series overview .
Kate Columbo ( later renamed Kate Callahan after an off - screen divorce ) is the wife of Lieutenant Columbo , the title character from the television series Columbo .
Kate is a news reporter who solves crimes while raising her daughter .
CAST
* Kate Mulgrew as Kate Columbo / Kate Callahan
* Lili Haydn as Jenny Callahan * Henry Jones as Josh Alden
* Don Stroud as Sergeant Mike Varrick PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Shortly after the Columbo series ended its original run on NBC in 1978 , despite objections from Columbo producers Richard Levinson and William Link , NBC executive Fred Silverman went forward in producing Mrs. Columbo as a spin - off to the original series .
The information NBC released about the show was unambiguous about the fact that Mrs. Columbo in the new series was in fact the previously unseen wife frequently mentioned on Columbo .
RETOOLING
Section::::Retooling .
The show received poor ratings , however , and as part of efforts to revamp it , the linkage between this Kate Columbo and the Mrs. Columbo of the original television series was reduced .
The name of the character was changed to Kate Callahan after an off - screen divorce , and the series was renamed Kate the Detective , followed by Kate Loves a Mystery .
In this ultimate incarnation , the producers completed their retreat from the show 's original premise , and Kate Callahan was then regarded as being a completely different character than Mrs. Columbo of Columbo , Kate 's ex - husband now named Philip .
None of the changes aided the new show 's ratings , however , and it was pulled from the air in 1980 , after 13 episodes .
EPISODES
SEASON 1 : 1979 SEASON 2 :
1979–80 RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Peter Falk expressed his disapproval of the spin - off , calling it a " bad idea " and " disgraceful " .
When Columbo returned to the air in 1989 on ABC , it was further established that Lt . Columbo and his wife Mrs. Columbo were still happily married and the existence of the series Mrs. Columbo was effectively ignored .
HOME MEDIA DVD RELEASE Section::::Home media .
Section::::DVD release .
The Mrs. Columbo episode " A Riddle for Puppets " was included as a bonus feature in the Region 1 DVD release of the fourth season of Columbo , released in August 2005 .
The episode " Murder Is a Parlor Game " was included in the third season of Columbo .
The episode " Caviar with Everything " was included in the fifth season of Columbo .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Mrs. Columbo on the Official Kate Mulgrew fansite