THE HANDMAID 'S TALE ( TV SERIES )
The Handmaid 's Tale is an American dystopian drama television series created by Bruce Miller , based on the 1985 novel of the same name by Margaret Atwood .
It was ordered by the streaming service Hulu as a straight - to - series order of 10 episodes , for which production began in late 2016 .
The plot features a dystopian future following a Second American Civil War wherein a totalitarian society subjects fertile women , called " Handmaids " , into child - bearing servitude .
The first three episodes of the series premiered on April 26 , 2017 ; the subsequent seven episodes aired on a weekly basis every Wednesday .
In May 2017 , the series was renewed for a second season which premiered on April 25 , 2018 .
The Handmaid 's Tale has received widespread critical acclaim and its first season won eight Primetime Emmy Awards from thirteen nominations , including Outstanding Drama Series .
It is the first show produced by Hulu to win a major award as well as the first series on a streaming service to win an Emmy for Outstanding Series .
It also became the first streaming series to win the Golden Globe Award for Best Television Series – Drama .
Elisabeth Moss was also awarded the Golden Globe for Best Actress .
In May 2018 , Hulu announced that the series had been renewed for a third season .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In the near future , fertility rates collapse as a result of sexually transmitted diseases and environmental pollution .
With this chaos , the totalitarian , theonomic government of " Gilead " establishes rule in the former United States in the aftermath of a civil war .
Society is organized by power - hungry leaders along with a new , militarized , hierarchical regime of fanaticism and newly created social classes , in which women are brutally subjugated , and by law are not allowed to work , own property , handle money , or read .
Worldwide infertility has resulted in the conscription of the few remaining fertile women in Gilead , called " Handmaids " , according to an extremist interpretation of the Biblical account of Bilhah .
They are assigned to the homes of the ruling elite , where they must submit to ritualized rape by their male masters in order to become pregnant and bear children for those men and their wives .
Alongside the Handmaids , much of society is now grouped into classes that dictate their freedoms and duties .
Women are divided into a small range of social categories , each one signified by a plain dress in a specific color : Handmaids wear red , Marthas ( who are housekeepers and cooks , named after the biblical figure ) wear green , and Wives ( who are expected to run their households ) wear blue and turquoise .
Econowives , the lower - class women who still have minimal agency , are a sort of mixture of all these categories , and they wear gray ( a departure from the book in which Econowives wear clothing striped with the aforementioned colors ) .
Women prisoners are called Unwomen and are worked to death clearing toxic waste in the Colonies .
Another class of women , Aunts ( who train and oversee the Handmaids ) , wear brown .
Additionally , the Eyes are a secret police watching over the general populace for signs of rebellion , Hunters track down people attempting to flee the country , and Jezebels are sex workers in secret brothels catering to the elite ruling class .
June Osborne , renamed Offred ( Elisabeth Moss ) , is the Handmaid assigned to the home of the Gileadan Commander Fred Waterford ( Joseph Fiennes ) and his wife Serena Joy ( Yvonne Strahovski ) .
Offred is subject to strict rules and constant scrutiny ; an improper word or deed on her part can lead to brutal punishment .
Offred , who is named after her male master ( " Of Fred " ) like all Handmaids , was married and had a daughter , a job , a bank account , and her own name and identity in the " time before " , but all she can safely do now is follow the rules of Gilead in hopes that she can someday live free again and be reunited with her husband and daughter .
The Waterfords , key players in the rise of Gilead , have their own conflicts with the realities of the society they have helped create .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN * Elisabeth Moss as June
Osborne / Offred , a woman who was captured while attempting to escape to Canada with her husband , Luke , and daughter , Hannah .
Due to her fertility , she is made a Handmaid to Commander Fred Waterford and his wife , Serena Joy , and is named " Offred " .
* Joseph Fiennes as Commander Fred Waterford , a high - ranking government official and June 's master .
Both he and his wife played an instrumental role in Gilead 's founding .
He wishes to have more contact with June outside of what is lawful between a Handmaid and her master , and starts inviting her to play nightly games of Scrabble .
* Yvonne Strahovski as Serena Joy Waterford , Fred 's wife and a former conservative cultural activist .
She appears to have accepted her new role in a society that she helped create .
She is poised and deeply religious , but capable of great cruelty and is often callous to June .
She is desperate to become a mother .
* Alexis Bledel as Emily
/ Ofglen / Ofsteven / Ofjoseph , June 's shopping partner .
Although June is initially wary of her , it is revealed Ofglen is not as pious as she seems , and the two become friends .
Ofglen had a wife and son , and was a university lecturer in cellular biology .
Being homosexual is punishable by death in Gilead , and most university professors are sent to labour camps , but Ofglen was spared and made a Handmaid , due to her fertility .
She is later captured and cruelly punished for her relationship with a Martha , and is sent to another household where she becomes " Ofsteven " .
She is involved with a resistance movement called " Mayday " .
* Madeline Brewer as Janine / Ofwarren / Ofdaniel , a Handmaid who entered the Red Center for training at the same time as June and considers June a friend due to her kind treatment .
Initially non - compliant , Janine 's right eye is removed as a punishment .
She becomes mentally unstable due to her treatment and often behaves in temperamental or childlike ways .
She gives birth to a child for Warren and Naomi Putnam , whom they name " Angela " , but Janine insists the baby 's name is " Charlotte " .
Janine is later reassigned and becomes " Ofdaniel " .
She was temporarily assigned to the Colonies until a bombing at the new Rachel and Leah Center .
* Ann Dowd as Aunt Lydia , a woman in charge of overseeing the Handmaids in their sexual reeducation and duties .
She is brutal and subjects insubordinate Handmaids to harsh physical punishment , but she also cares for her charges and believes deeply in the Gileadean mission and doctrine .
She appears to have a soft spot for Janine , and even goes so far as to address her by her given name on occasion .
* O. T. Fagbenle as Lucas " Luke " Bankole , June 's husband from before Gilead .
Because he is divorced ( he and June began their relationship before his divorce from his first wife ) , their union is considered invalid in the new society .
June is considered an adulteress and their daughter , Hannah , is considered illegitimate .
Initially , June believes he has been killed , but it is later revealed Luke managed to escape to Canada .
* Max Minghella as Nick Blaine , Commander Waterford 's driver and a former drifter from Michigan who has feelings for June .
June and Nick develop an intimate relationship and she eventually discovers that he is an Eye , a spy for Gilead .
* Samira Wiley as Moira / Ruby , June 's best friend since college .
She is already at the Red Center when June enters Handmaid training but escapes before being assigned to a home .
She is recaptured and becomes " Ruby " , a Jezebel .
She seems to have given up hope of ever being free , but on meeting June again regains the conviction to escape .
* Amanda Brugel as Rita ( recurring season 1 , main season 2–present ) , a Martha at the Waterford home .
She had a son who died fighting in the civil war when he was 19 years old .
* Bradley Whitford as Commander Joseph Lawrence ( recurring season 2 , main season 3 ) , the founder of the Colonies .
RECURRING
* Ever Carradine as Naomi Putnam , Commander Warren Putnam 's wife .
* Tattiawna Jones as Lillie Fuller
/ Ofglen No . 2 , who replaces Emily in the position after Emily is captured by the Eyes .
She initially follows the rules and does not wish to upset the status quo , but this is because she believes her life as a Handmaid is better than the difficult , impoverished life she led prior to Gilead , rather than out of religious piety .
* Nina Kiri as Alma / Ofrobert , another Handmaid who trained at the Red Center with June , Moira , and Janine .
She is frank and chatty , and often trades gossip and news with June .
She is also involved with Mayday and becomes June 's first contact with the resistance group .
* Jenessa Grant as Dolores / Ofsamuel , a local Handmaid with a friendly and talkative nature .
* Bahia Watson as Brianna / Oferic , another local Handmaid who is friends with June .
* Jordana Blake as Hannah Bankole , June and Luke 's daughter .
She is later renamed Agnes .
* Erin Way as Erin , a young , apparently mute , woman who was being trained to become a Handmaid but managed to escape to Canada .
* Sydney Sweeney as Eden Spencer ( season 2 ) , a pious and obedient girl who was Nick 's wife .
* Greg Bryk as Commander Ray Cushing ( season 2 )
* Rohan Mead as Isaac ( season 2 ) , a Guardian assigned to the Waterford home .
* Julie Dretzin as Eleanor Lawrence ( season 2 ) , Joseph 's wife .
GUEST
* Kristen Gutoskie as Beth ( season 1 ) , a Martha at Jezebel 's .
She has an arrangement with Nick whereby she trades illegal alcohol and other contraband for drugs , which the Jezebels use .
She has a casual sexual relationship with him and is aware that he is an Eye .
* Marisa Tomei as Mrs. O'Conner ( season 2 ) , a Commander 's wife who is sent to the colonies as punishment for having sex with another man .
* Cherry Jones as Holly Maddox ( season 2 ) , June 's mother , an outspoken feminist .
* Clea DuVall as Sylvia ( season 2 ) , Emily 's wife .
* Yahya Abdul - Mateen II as Omar ( season 2 ) a man who helps June attempt to escape .
* John Carroll Lynch as Dan ( season 2 ) , Emily 's boss at the university where she worked .
* Kelly Jenrette as Annie ( season 2 ) , Luke 's ex - wife .
* Rebecca Rittenhouse as Odette ( season 2 ) , a Doctor and Moira 's fiancée .
* Sam Jaeger as Mark Tuello ( season 2 ) , a mysterious stranger who Serena encounters in Canada .
* Oprah Winfrey ( uncredited ) as Newsreader ( season 2 ) on a car radio .
EPISODES SERIES
OVERVIEW SEASON 1 ( 2017 )
SEASON 2 ( 2018 )
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
A straight - to - series order by Hulu of The Handmaid 's Tale was announced in April 2016 , with Elisabeth Moss set to star .
Based on the 1985 novel of the same name by Margaret Atwood , the series was created by Bruce Miller , who is also an executive producer with Daniel Wilson , Fran Sears , and Warren Littlefield .
Atwood serves as consulting producer , giving feedback on some of the areas where the series expands upon or modernizes the book .
She also played a small cameo role in the first episode .
Moss is also a producer .
In June 2016 , Reed Morano was announced as director of the series .
Samira Wiley , Max Minghella , and Ann Dowd joined the cast in July 2016 .
Joseph Fiennes , Madeline Brewer , and Yvonne Strahovski were cast in August 2016 , followed by O. T. Fagbenle and Amanda Brugel in September 2016 .
In October 2016 , Ever Carradine joined the cast , and Alexis Bledel was added in January 2017 .
Filming on the series took place in Toronto , Mississauga , Hamilton , Burlington , Oakville , and Cambridge , Ontario , from September 2016 to February 2017 .
The first full trailer of the TV series was released by Hulu on YouTube on March 23 , 2017 .
The series premiered on April 26 , 2017 .
On May 3 , 2017 , The Handmaid 's Tale was renewed for a second season to premiere in 2018 .
Moss told the news media that the subsequent episodes would cover further developments in the story , filling in some of the unanswered questions and continuing the narrative already " finished " in the book .
The second season consists of 13 episodes and began filming in fall 2017 .
Alexis Bledel returned as a series regular .
Showrunner Bruce Miller stated that he envisioned 10 seasons of the show , stating , " Well , you know , honestly , when I started , I tried to game out in my head what would ten seasons be like ?
If you hit a home run , you want energy to go around the bases , you want enough story to keep going , if you can hook the audience to care about these people enough that they 're actually crying at the finale . "
Season 2 was filmed primarily in Toronto , Ontario , but some scenes were shot in Hamilton , Ontario and in Cambridge , Ontario .
Season 3 started production in Toronto in October 2018 .
Scenes for season 3 were also filmed in Cambridge , Ontario in November 2018 .
BROADCAST AND RELEASE Section::::Broadcast and release .
The first three episodes of the series premiered on April 26 , 2017 ; the subsequent seven episodes were released on a weekly basis .
In Canada , the series is broadcast weekly by Bravo and the streaming service CraveTV ; the first two episodes premiered on April 30 , 2017 .
In Scandinavia , the series is available on HBO Nordic .
In the United Kingdom , the series premiered on May 28 , 2017 , on Channel 4 .
In Ireland , the series premiered on February 5 , 2018 on RTÉ2 , with a showing of the first two episodes .
RTÉ also became the first broadcaster in Europe to debut Season 2 following its broadcast in the US and Canada .
In Brazil , the series premiered on March 7 , 2018 , on Paramount Channel .
In New Zealand , the series was released on the subscription video on demand service Lightbox on June 8 , 2017 .
In Australia , the series premiered on the TV channel SBS 's video streaming service SBS on Demand , on July 6 , 2017 .
The first season was released on Blu - ray and DVD on March 13 , 2018 .
The second season was released on Blu - ray and DVD on December 4 , 2018 .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE
Rotten
TomatoesMetacritic SEASON 1 Section::::Season 1 .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the first season has an approval rating of 95 % based on 107 reviews , with an average rating of 8.7/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , "
Haunting and vivid , The Handmaid 's Tale is an endlessly engrossing adaptation of Margaret Atwood 's dystopian novel that 's anchored by a terrific central performance from Elisabeth Moss . "
On Metacritic , it has a weighted average score of 92 out of 100 based on 41 critics , indicating " universal acclaim " .
Daniel Fienberg of The Hollywood Reporter called it " probably the spring 's best new show " .
Jen Chaney of Vulture gave it a highly positive review , and wrote that it is " A faithful adaptation of the book that also brings new layers to Atwood 's totalitarian , sexist world of forced surrogate motherhood " and that " this series is meticulously paced , brutal , visually stunning , and so suspenseful from moment to moment that only at the end of each hour will you feel fully at liberty to exhale " .
There was much debate on whether parallels could be drawn between the series ( and by extension , the book it is based on ) and American society during the Presidency of Donald Trump .
A comparison has also been made to the Salafi / Wahabbi extremism of ISIL , under which enslaved women of religious minorities are passed around and utilized as sex objects and vessels to bear new jihadis .
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the second season has an approval rating of 92 % based on 74 reviews , with an average rating of 8.31/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Beautifully shot but dishearteningly relevant , The Handmaid 's Tale centers its sophomore season tightly around its compelling cast of characters , making room for broader social commentary through more intimate lenses . "
On Metacritic , it has a weighted average score of 86 out of 100 based on 28 critics , indicating " universal acclaim " .
However , the second season of the show received criticism for being excessive in its depictions of violence with critics questioning whether it was merely " torture porn " and going too far .
The Atlantics Sophie Gilbert wrote : " There came a point during the first episode where , for me , it became too much . "
Lisa Miller of The Cut wrote : " I have pressed mute and fast forward so often this season , I am forced to wonder : ' Why am I watching this ' ?
It all feels so gratuitous , like a beating that never ends . "
And The Daily Telegraphs Rebecca Reid admitted she had an anxiety attack watching an episode of the show .
AWARDS SEE ALSO * List of original programs distributed by Hulu REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * – official site at Hulu