PRISON BREAK ( SEASON 5 )
The fifth season of Prison Break ( also known as Prison Break : Resurrection ) is a limited event television series and a revival of the original series created by Paul Scheuring that aired on Fox from 2005 to 2009 .
The season is produced by 20th Century Fox Television in association with Adelstein / Parouse Productions and Original Film .
Paul Scheuring serves as showrunner , with himself , Marty Adelstein , Neal H. Moritz and Dawn Olmstead , Vaun Wilmott , Michael Horowitz and Nelson McCormick serving as executive producers .
McCormick also serves as director .
The season premiered on April 4 , 2017 , and concluded on May 30 , 2017 , consisting of 9 episodes .
Wentworth Miller and Dominic Purcell reprise their respective roles as Michael Scofield and Lincoln Burrows , while Sarah Wayne Callies , Amaury Nolasco , Paul Adelstein , Robert Knepper and Rockmond Dunbar also return from the original series .
New cast additions include Mark Feuerstein , Inbar Lavi , Augustus Prew , Marina Benedict , Rick Yune and Steve Mouzakis .
A pilot was ordered in August 2015 and the series was greenlit in January 2016 .
Production on the series began in April 2016 and filming took place in Vancouver and the Moroccan cities of Rabat , Casablanca , and Ouarzazate .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
Seven years after his apparent death , Michael Scofield resurfaces in the notorious Ogygia Prison in Sana'a , Yemen , under the name Kaniel Outis .
As the country is engulfed by war , two of Michael 's old friends , his brother Lincoln Burrows and fellow Fox River escapee Benjamin " C - Note " Franklin , risk their lives by traveling to Yemen to bring Michael home .
Back in the United States , Michael 's wife Sara , now remarried , is hunted by agents of an operative known as Poseidon , the one responsible for Michael 's disappearance .
CAST MAIN * Wentworth Miller as Michael Scofield / Kaniel Outis * Dominic Purcell as Lincoln Burrows * Sarah Wayne Callies as Sara Tancredi - Scofield
* Paul Adelstein as Paul Kellerman * Rockmond Dunbar as Benjamin Miles " C - Note " Franklin * Robert Knepper as Theodore " T - Bag " Bagwell * Amaury Nolasco as Fernando Sucre * Mark Feuerstein as Jacob Anton Ness / Poseidon * Inbar Lavi as Sheba
* Augustus Prew as David " Whip "
Martin
RECURRING
* Rick Yune as Ja * Marina Benedict as Emily
Blake / A&W * Steve Mouzakis as Van Gogh * Amin El Gamal as Cyclops * Kunal Sharma as Sid
* Numan Acar as Abu Ramal * Curtis Lum as Agent Kishida * Crystal Balint as Heather
* Waleed Zuaiter as Mohammad al - Tunis
* TJ Ramini as Cross
* Akin Gazi as Omar * Christian Michael Cooper as Mike Scofield EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
On January 12 , 2015 , at the 2015 Winter TCA Press Tour , Wentworth Miller and Dominic Purcell revealed the possibility that Fox was interested in bringing back Prison Break , with Miller stating : " We actually floated the idea to Fox very casually and they seemed very not casual about this interest .
They seemed to think there was something there . "
Purcell concluded by adding , " It 's something that Fox is , as Wentworth said , potentially excited about . "
On January 17 , 2015 , Fox Television Group chairman and CEO Gary Newman made it clear that they would love to bring Prison Break back for another run , although Fox had nothing to report .
Newman himself stated , " There 's some speculation in the press at Prison Break and we 've made it clear at the studio that we 'd bring Prison Break back at the studio [ ...
] It 's the perfect event series .
But at the moment , we have nothing else to report . "
On June 2 , 2015 , it was reported that a limited series revival of Paul Scheuring 's Prison Break was in development at Fox .
On August 6 , 2015 , Fox confirmed a 10-episode order for the revival .
The limited series is a sequel to the original series , taking place several years later , and features Miller and Purcell reprising their roles as well as the return of other original characters .
Fox Television Group chairman and CEO
Dana Walden herself stated that Prison Break has performed particularly well internationally and on SVOD platforms such as Netflix .
Walden added that : " a logical and believable explanation to why the characters are alive and still moving around the world [ ... ]
" Walden said .
" The brothers and some of the iconic characters will be back , and it will address some questions that were set up at the end of the series for a new audience . "
On January 15 , 2016 , Fox officially ordered the revival to series , with the episode order revised to nine episodes , though Fox declined to announce how many episodes the series will run .
The original producing team of creator Paul Scheuring , Neal Moritz , Marty Adelstein and Dawn Olmstead were all confirmed as to return for the event series as executive producers , with Scheuring writing and serving as showrunner .
WRITING Section::::Writing .
On August 7 , 2015 , it was announced that creator and executive producer Paul Scheuring would be writing the first episode as well as a style / tone bible for other writers to follow .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
On January 15 , 2016 , stars Wentworth Miller and Dominic Purcell were confirmed to be reprising their roles as brothers Michael Scofield and Lincoln Burrows .
On February 22 , 2016 , it was reported that Mark Feuerstein would play Scott Ness ( later changed to Jacob Ness ) , the husband of Dr. Sara Tancredi , a Professor of Economics ( game theory ) at Cornell who has been described as , " dubious of the government but still has a bit of fight in him when it comes to taking them on . "
Additionally , on February 22 , 2016 , it was confirmed that Sarah Wayne Callies was in talks to reprise her role in the follow - up along with Robert Knepper , Rockmond Dunbar and Amaury Nolasco , although there were no deals in place with any of them at that time .
On March 9 , 2016 , Augustus Prew , Rick Yune and Steve Mouzakis were cast for " heavily recurring roles " .
Prew plays " funny , crazy and pretty damn sharp " Whip ; Yune plays Ja , who is described as a " Korean identity thief , who disheveled appearance belies his genius " ; and Mouzakis plays Van Gogh , " a bad - ass nut - job " .
On March 9 , 2016 , Sarah Wayne Callies was confirmed to be returning as Sara Tancredi .
On March 16 , 2016 , Amin El Gamal was cast in a recurring role , playing Cyclops .
On March 17 , 2016 , it was announced that original stars Robert Knepper , Amaury Nolasco and Rockmond Dunbar would be reprising their respective roles as T - Bag , Sucre and C - Note , respectively .
On March 21 , 2016 , Paul Adelstein was confirmed to be reprising his role as Paul Kellerman .
On March 21 , 2016 , Inbar Lavi , Marina Benedict and Kunal Sharma were cast in major recurring roles .
Lavi plays Sheba , an operator / fixer / activist who becomes involved with Burrows .
Benedict is A&W , " a crazed and fearless villainess who is unconcerned about her physical well - being but ruthless and efficient in completing her deadly goals " , and Sharma plays Sid , a man in prison .
On April 22 , 2016 , it was announced that Faran Tahir would play Jamil , whom Tahir describes as " a man who has an inner conflict which again is something I love experimenting with . "
In July 2016 , it was revealed that William Fichtner would not be reprising his role as Alexander Mahone .
Robert Knepper told Digital Spy that " [ writer ] Paul Scheuring loves Bill Fichtner and I love Bill Fichtner .
He 's a brilliant actor – but Paul honestly said to me , ' I do n't know what to do with that character ' .
He did n't want to just bring everybody back , so that the audience go , ' Oh , look , it 's Bill Fichtner again ! '
– he honestly thought , ' I 'm not sure where to do that in the plot . '
So if someday there 's another chapter of this , maybe then Bill will be back .
But I think the characters that are there , each of our moments that we have , are key to the storytelling , which is how it should be . "
FILMING Section::::Filming . Production on the season began in April 7 , 2016 , in Vancouver , once Miller and Purcell completed filming for Legends of Tomorrow .
Filming concluded in Vancouver on July 11 , 2016 .
On June 1 , 2016 , Dominic Purcell was almost killed on set in Morocco , after an iron bar used as a set piece had fallen onto his head , which caused a broken nose and a head injury .
Purcell was immediately airlifted from Marrakesh to Casablanca for treatment where he recovered .
Filming of the series was not substantially disrupted due to the accident .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Composer Ramin Djawadi stated that he would definitely like to return and work on the new season of Prison Break , after learning of the news of the possible revival , to which further stated , " I literally just heard it , so it 's news for me .
It 's very exciting because the show was such a good show
but nobody has contacted me at this point .
" Djawadi later added , " Most likely , if my schedule allows - that show was very close to me .
I loved all the people involved .
I thought it was an incredible show .
Absolutely . " In June 2016 , it was confirmed that Djawadi would return as composer for season five .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the season has an approval rating of 53 % based on 32 reviews , with an average score of 5.94/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Prison Break recaptures some of its old urgency in its return , but familiar faces and frenetic action are n't enough to make up for a plot that manages to bore while beggaring belief . "
On Metacritic , the season has a score of 48 out of 100 , based on 18 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
RATINGS HOME
MEDIA RELEASE Section::::Home media release .
The event series was released on Blu - ray and DVD on June 27 , 2017 .
Special features include a behind - the - scenes featurette , " A Return Home :
The Making of Prison Break Event Series " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS