YOU ME HER
You Me
Her is an American - Canadian comedy - drama television series that revolves around a suburban married couple who is entering a three - way romantic relationship , otherwise known as a polyamorous relationship .
The series is set in Portland , Oregon and was created by John Scott Shepherd .
The series is also promoted as TV 's " first polyromantic comedy " .
On June 9 , 2016 , Audience Network renewed the series for a second and third season .
The third season premiered on March 20 , 2018 .
On July 27 , 2018 , the series was renewed for a fourth and fifth season .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
The series revolves around
married , vanilla thirty - somethings Jack and Emma Trakarsky , from Portland , Oregon , whose desires to conceive have been hampered by their lack of sex drive .
One day , Jack 's efforts to solve the problem leads both him and Emma to Izzy Silva , a 25-year - old college student and part - time escort .
After initially intending to see her as clients , the two jointly start to fall in love with Izzy , who in turn starts to feel the same way .
Consequently , they decide to terminate the arrangement and bring Izzy into the marriage as a lover .
This opens up a world of new challenges as they find themselves having to navigate their way through a minefield of prying , nosy neighbours with very narrow social norms and prejudices , whilst at the same time struggling to confront their own feelings and insecurities , and adjust to the unfamiliar dynamic of a polyamorous relationship .
CAST MAIN * Greg Poehler as Jack Trakarsky , student counsellor , and Emma 's husband .
* Rachel Blanchard as Emma Trakarsky , an architect .
* Priscilla Faia as Isabelle " Izzy " Silva , a graduate student in Psychology and call girl .
* Melanie Papalia as Nina Martone , Izzy 's roommate .
( recurring season 1 , main season 2 - 3 ) RECURRING * Jarod Joseph as Andy Cutler , Izzy 's brief love interest who later becomes romantically involved with Nina .
* Kevin O'Grady ( season 1 ) and Dave Collette ( season 2 ) as Gabe , Jack 's brother and confidant .
* Jennifer Spence as Carmen Amari , one of the Trakarsky 's neighbors and Emma 's best friend .
* Ennis Esmer as Dave Amari , one of the Trakarsky 's neighbors and Jack 's best friend .
* Chelah Horsdal as Lori Matherfield , the Trakarsky 's nosy neighbor and Ava 's mother .
( season 1 - 2 )
* Laine MacNeil as Ava Matherfield , Lori 's teenage daughter .
( season 1 - 2 ) * Jerry Wasserman as Dean Weinstock .
( season 1 ) * Patrick Gilmore as Shaun , a bartender and Nina 's employer , and later her new love interest .
* Michael Hogan as Emma 's father .
( season 2 )
* Agam Darshi as Ruby Shivani , Jack 's high school girlfriend .
( season 2 )
* Carmel Amit as Kylie , Emma 's new girlfriend in Seattle .
( season 3 ) EPISODES SERIES
OVERVIEW SEASON 1 ( 2016 )
SEASON 2 ( 2017 )
SEASON 3 ( 2018 )
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
Seasons one , two and three are available on Netflix exclusively outside of the United States and Canada .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Filmed in Vancouver , British Columbia .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS