TRAIN TO BUSAN Train to Busan ( ) is a 2016 South Korean zombie apocalypse action thriller film directed by Yeon Sang - ho and starring Gong Yoo , Jung Yu - mi , and Ma Dong - seok .
The film takes place on a train to Busan , as a zombie apocalypse suddenly breaks out in the country and compromises the safety of the passengers .
The film premiered in the Midnight Screenings section of the 2016 Cannes Film Festival on
13 May. On 7 August , the film set a record as the first Korean film of 2016 to break the audience record of over 10 million theatergoers .
The film serves as a reunion for Gong Yoo and Jung Yu - mi , who both starred in the 2011 film The Crucible .
An animated prequel , Seoul Station , also directed by Yeon , was released less than a month later .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Seok - woo , a divorced fund manager , is a workaholic and absentee father to his young daughter Su - an .
For her birthday the next day , she wishes for her father to take her to Busan to see her mother .
They board the KTX 101 at Seoul Station .
Others on the same train include the tough working - class husband Sang - hwa and his pregnant wife Seong - kyeong , a high school baseball team , the rich and egotistical COO Yon - suk , elderly sisters
In - gil and Jon - gil , and a homeless man experiencing post - traumatic stress disorder .
As the train departs , a convulsing young woman boards the train with a bite wound on her leg .
She soon turns into a zombie and attacks a train attendant , who then turns into a zombie .
The virus quickly spreads throughout the train .
Baseball player Yong - guk , a girl named Jin - hee , who has a crush on him , and several passengers escape to another car .
News broadcasts report zombie outbreaks ( reported as riots ) nationwide and Cheonan - Asan station was attacked by zombies so they passed it .
After the train stops at Daejeon station , the surviving passengers find the city and station also overrun , and they hastily retreat back to the train , splitting up into different train cars in the chaos .
The conductor restarts the train to head to Busan , where a quarantine zone has reportedly been established .
Seok - woo , Sang - hwa and Yong - guk fight their way to where Su - an , In - gil , Seong - kyeong and the homeless man are hiding .
Together , they struggle through the zombie horde to the front train car , where the other passengers are sheltered .
At the instigation of Yon - suk , however , the passengers block the survivors from entering , fearing that they are infected .
Sang - hwa and In - gil sacrifice themselves to give the others time to force open the door and enter the car .
Yon - suk demands that the newcomers isolate themselves in the vestibule , and the others follow his lead .
When Jong - gil deliberately opens the door to the zombies to be with her zombified sister In - gil , the zombies kill the rest of the passengers , leaving Seok - woo , Su - an , Seong - kyeong , Yong - guk , Jin - hee and the homeless man safe , as they are in the vestibule .
Yon - suk and the train attendant escape the onslaught by hiding in the bathroom .
A blocked track at East Daegu train station forces the survivors to stop and search for another train .
In the process , Seok - woo , Seong - kyeong , Su - an , and the homeless man are separated from Yong - guk and Jin - hee .
Yon - suk escapes after pushing the train attendant to be killed by the zombies , then does the same with Jin - hee .
Heartbroken , Yong - guk stays with Jin - hee and is soon bitten by her .
The train conductor starts a locomotive on another track but is also killed by zombies while trying to save Yon - suk .
The homeless man sacrifices himself to let Su - an and Seong - kyeong escape with Seok - woo into the train the conductor had activated .
They encounter Yon - suk in the motorman 's cab , on the verge of turning into a zombie , having been bitten when the train conductor saved him .
Seok - woo fights him off , but is himself bitten .
He puts Su - an and Seong - kyeong inside the engine room and shares his last words with his daughter before moving outside .
As he zombifies , he thinks of the first time he held his daughter in his arms and throws himself off the locomotive with a smile .
Su - an and Seong - kyeong get off at Busan and begin walking through a train tunnel .
On the other side of the tunnel are soldiers stationed to defend the perimeter against zombies .
Unable to see the new arrivals clearly , the soldiers at the checkpoint are instructed to shoot them .
However , the soldiers then hear singing , which makes them realize the newcomers are human .
Su - an tearfully sings the song she had wanted to perform for her father , and now sings it to honor his sacrifice .
CAST
*
Gong Yoo as Seok - woo , a fund manager obsessed with his work
* Jung Yu - mi as Seong - kyeong , Sang - hwa 's pregnant wife
* Kim Su - an as Su - an , Seok - woo 's young daughter who wants to go to Busan to see her mother
*
Ma Dong - seok as Sang - hwa , a tough , working - class man * Choi Woo - shik as Yong - guk , a young baseball player
*
Ahn So - hee as Jin - hee , Yong - guk 's close friend * Kim Eui - sung as Yon - suk , a rich COO * Choi Gwi - hwa as a homeless man
*
Jung Suk - yong as Captain of KTX
*
Ye Soo - jung as In - gil * Park Myung - sin as Jong - gil
* Jang Hyuk - jin as Ki - chul
* Kim Chang - hwan as Kim Jin - mo
* Kim Yool - ho as Man in suit ( cameo ) * Shim Eun - kyung as Runaway Girl ( cameo ) RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Train to Busan grossed $ 93.1 million worldwide .
It became the highest - grossing Korean film in Malaysia , Hong Kong , and Singapore .
It recorded more than 11 million moviegoers in South Korea .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a 95 % rating based on 87 critics , and an average rating of 7.6/10 .
The website 's critical consensus states : " Train to Busan delivers a thrillingly unique and purely entertaining take on the zombie genre , with fully realized characters and plenty of social commentary to underscore the bursts of skillfully staged action . "
Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , gives the film an average score of 72 based on 15 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews . "
Clark Collis of Entertainment Weekly wrote that the film " borrows heavily from World War Z in its depiction of the fast - moving undead masses while also boasting an emotional core the Brad Pitt - starring extravaganza often lacked , " adding that " the result is first - class throughout . "
At The New York Times , Jeannette Catsoulis selected the film her " Critic 's Pick " and took notice of its subtle class warfare .
Filmmaker Edgar Wright , who directed the BAFTA nominated zombie - comedy Shaun of the Dead , was a big fan of the film .
Wright recommended the film in a tweet and called it the " best zombie movie I 've seen in forever . "
In contrast , the negative reviews have described the film as " Snowpiercer with zombies . "
David Ehrlich of IndieWire comments that " as the characters whittle away into archetypes ( and start making senseless decisions ) , the spectacle also sheds its unique personality . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Award !
Date of ceremony !
Category !
Recipient(s ) !
Result ! class="unsortable
" rowspan=4Baeksang Arts Awards rowspan=4May 3 , 2017
Best Film
rowspan=4 rowspan=2Best
Supporting Actor Kim Eui - sung Ma Dong - seok
Best
New Director Yeon Sang - ho rowspan=2Chunsa Film Awards rowspan=2May 24 , 2017 Kwak Tae - yong rowspan=2 Special Audience Award for Best Film Train to Busan HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
American distributor
Well Go USA released DVD and Blu - ray versions of Train to Busan on 17 January 2017 .
FNC Add Culture released the Korean DVD and Blu - ray versions on 22 February 2017 .
It is also available on Netflix and Amazon Prime Video streaming .
REMAKE AND SEQUEL Section::::Remake and sequel .
Variety said in December 2016 that Gaumont would remake Train to Busan in English .
On September 25 , 2018 , Deadline reports James Wan will be producing the remake with Gary Dauberman writing the script .
South Korean director Yeon Sang - ho is working on a sequel to Train to Busan with the korean title Bando .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS