VEERE DI WEDDING Veere Di Wedding ( translation : Brother 's Wedding ) is a 2018 Indian Hindi - language female buddy comedy film , directed by Shashanka Ghosh and co - produced by Rhea Kapoor , Ekta Kapoor and Nikhil Dwivedi .
It stars Kareena Kapoor , Sonam Kapoor , Swara Bhaskar and Shikha Talsania in lead roles , as four friends attending a wedding .
Veere Di Wedding released theatrically on 1 June 2018 and received mixed reviews from critics , with praise towards the chemistry and performances of the cast .
Made on a budget of , the film earned over worldwide to emerge as one of the highest - grossing Hindi films featuring a female lead .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The story revolves around four best friends - Kalindi ( Kareena Kapoor Khan ) , Avni ( Sonam Kapoor ) , Sakshi ( Swara Bhaskar ) , and Meera , who stay friends from high school through adulthood .
The friends ( Veere ; " bros " ) are living their own lives in different places when they reunite for Kalindi 's wedding .
Kalindi has been living with her boyfriend , Rishabh ( Sumeet Vyas ) for two years in Australia .
When he proposes to her , she is shocked .
Coming from a broken home , Kalindi is averse to the idea of marriage .
Her parents got divorced when she was young and her father remarried another woman soon after her mother 's death .
Nevertheless , Kalindi agrees for Rishabh 's happiness .
Avni is a blossoming divorce lawyer in Delhi but her mother is on the constant lookout for suitable grooms .
Sakshi is living with her parents after moving out from her husband 's due to their impending divorce .
Though she retaliates , she still gets upset at the taunts she has to hear from neighbors because of her divorcee status .
Meera lives in America , having married an American , John , with whom she has a son .
She is estranged from her foster father because of it , and though she misses him , she refuses to get in touch until he accepts John .
When Kalindi travels to Delhi to get married , she is overwhelmed by Rishabh 's large family and their extreme involvement in the wedding , wanting to make it a huge event to " maintain face " in society .
While in Delhi , Kalindi lives with her gay uncle and his partner rather than her father , and reunites with her veere .
Avni wishes to get married too and meets a few prospective grooms through her mother .
Kalindi 's father tries to get involved in her wedding along with his wife , but she rebuffs their advances .
She is torn between Rishabh 's family and hers , resulting in her becoming anxious .
During her engagement party , Rishabh makes a comment about her family 's instability to which Kalindi breaks off the engagement with him .
Avni gets drunk to forget the fact that her prospective groom rejected her and ends up sleeping with Bhandari , Rishabh 's cousin .
The next day , Rishabh apologizes to Kalindi and she forgives him .
However , she explains that she can not fulfill his family 's expectations of her and breaks up with Rishabh .
Her friends however , are not supportive of this decision , and try to reason with her , explaining that Rishabh is a good man
and she should n't run away from their issues over his family .
Kalindi stubbornly points out each of her friend 's flaws instead , resulting in everyone getting into an argument and leaving .
A month later , Sakshi , believing they have become too overwhelmed with life 's troubles , buys her veere a vacation to Thailand .
They reconnect with each other and come clear about their respective issues : Kalindi about her commitment issues stemming from her broken family ; Avni about wanting to marry the right guy and sleeping with Bhandari ; Sakshi about why her husband wants to divorce her .
Sakshi and her husband were always fighting after marriage .
One day , he walked in on her masturbating ; appalled , he decided to divorce her .
Sakshi is embarrassed to tell her parents the truth about the divorce .
Meera explains that she and John have n't had sex in a year after the birth of her son .
Everyone decides to go back and face their problems .
Kalindi proposes to Rishabh and decides to marry him .
Avni decides to give Bhandari a chance , as he is already smitten with her .
Sakshi tells her parents the truth and to her surprise , they are very supportive .
Kalindi 's friends make Kalindi 's father and uncle resolve their feud for Kalindi 's happiness ; her father mends his relationship with Kalindi and bequeaths the family house to her .
On the day of the wedding , Kalindi wears her mother 's old wedding gown and the ceremony is a small intimate ceremony with fewer guests in contrast to the previous one .
John calls Meera 's father and tells them about their son .
He comes to the wedding and is reunited with Meera .
The film ends with everyone dancing at Kalindi and Rishabh 's wedding reception .
CAST * Kareena Kapoor as Kalindi Puri
* Smriti Setya as Young Kalindi * Sonam Kapoor as Avni Sharma
* Muskaan Khubchandani as Young Avni
* Swara Bhaskar as Sakshi Soni
* Muskaan Malhotra as Young Sakshi
* Shikha Talsania as Meera Kaur Sood Stinson
* Kashish Kanwar as Young Meera * Neena Gupta as Avni 's mother * Sumeet Vyas as Rishabh Malhotra , Kalindi 's fiancé
* Vishwas Kini as Bhandari
* Vivek Mushran as Cookie Chacha , Kalindi 's uncle *
Ayesha Raza Mishra as Rishabh 's mother
* Manoj Pahwa as Rishabh 's father * Alka Kaushal as Santosh aunty , Bhandari 's mother
* Ekavali Khanna as Paromita , Kalindi 's stepmother * Sukesh Arora as Keshav , Cookie 's boyfriend * Anjum Rajabali as Kishan Puri , Kalindi 's father * Ishwak Singh as Nirmal * Suraj Singh as Vineet * Edward Sonnenblick as John Stinson , Meera 's husband * Kamlesh Gill as Jhaaiji * Bubbles Sabharwal as Sakshi 's mother
* Babla Kochar as Sakshi 's father
* Kalpana Jha as Shanti * Kavita Ghai as Kalindi 's mother PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
In December 2015 , Sonam Kapoor indicated that she would be working on a project with her sister Rhea Kapoor .
The project was officially announced in June 2016 .
The project was delayed due to Kareena Kapoor 's pregnancy .
Principal photography began in September 2017 .
The movie was shot in Delhi , Mumbai and Bangkok .
Swara Bhaskar , Kareena Kapoor and Shikha Talsania agreed to act in the film .
Sumeet Vyas was cast as Kareena 's boyfriend .
The project underwent three major schedules in Delhi , Mumbai and Phuket .
The trailer was released on April 25 .
The first song from the movie , Tareefan , was released on May 2 .
LEGAL ISSUES Section::::Legal issues .
Another Hindi film with a similar title Veerey Ki Wedding , starring Pulkit Samrat , Kriti Kharbanda and Jimmy Shergill appeared while the movie was in production .
Legal action brought by father - daughter duo Anil Kapoor and Rhea Kapoor to challenge the use of such a similar name was unsuccessful .
The film was banned in Pakistan and Kuwait for its explicit language and sexuality .
When asked about the ban in Pakistan , Swara Bhaskar responded that it 's evident that it would be banned in a non - secular nation states run by Sharia Law , like Pakistan and further elaborated that the people of Pakistan would in fact watch the movie citing tweets from them .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The music of the film is composed by Shashwat Sachdev , Vishal Mishra and White Noise while the lyrics are penned by Anvita Dutt Guptan , Raj Shekhar , Qaran , Rupin Pahwa , White Noise , Shashwat Sachdev , Badshah , Shellee and Gaurav Solanki .
The first song of the film , Tareefan which is sung by Badshah was released on 2 May 2018 .
The soundtrack was released by Zee Music Company on 8 May 2018 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Veere Di Wedding had net earnings of 10.70 crore on its first day in India , setting the record for the highest opening day collection for a Hindi film with female protagonist(s ) .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Several critics noted the film 's similarities to the television series Sex and the City .
Comparisons were also drawn with the comedy Bridesmaids ( 2011 ) , Bachelorette ( 2012 ) and the Indian television miniseries The Trip ( 2016 ) .
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , Veere Di Wedding has an approval score of 63 % on the basis of 8 reviews with an average rating of 6.4 out of 10 .
INDIA Section::::India .
Rachit Gupta of The Times of India gave the film a 3.5 ( out of 5 ) rating , calling it a " brave effort .
"
He praised the concept of the film , the performances and the chemistry between the leads , but criticized the pace and felt that the story lacked depth .
A reviewer for Bollywood Hungama giving a similar rating and review to the film commented that " Veere Di Wedding rests on a great idea and interesting characters .
But it does n't translate into a fully entertaining fare .
It 's the direction that plays spoilsport . "
Sweta Kaushal of Hindustan Times gave the film 2/5 stars and said it " tries to subvert the male dominant stereotype but these moments are so few and far between that you almost miss the point . "
Devesh Sharma of Filmfare rated it 3.5 ( out of 5 stars ) and opined that the film 's greatest strength was the chemistry between the leads : " that beneath all the cuss words and the sex jokes you get a whiff of genuine friendship . "
Conversely , Chaya Unnakrishnan ( writing for Daily News and Analysis ) felt that the chemistry between the leads seemed forced at times .
She rated the film 3 ( out of 5 ) stars and insisted that it should not be watched as one that dealt with women empowerment .
Raja Sen ( writing for NDTV ) , in a 3.5/5 rating , noted that the film " lands several blows to the patriarchy while never giving up its masala entertainer roots . "
Saibal Chatterjee , also from NDTV , however , was critical of the screenplay and the predictability of the plot , and wrote that it was watchable " because of the lively performances from the four actresses . "
He gave the film 2 stars ( out of 5 ) .
Rajeev Masand , writing for CNN - News18 , criticized the film along the same lines , and added that it was " largely contrived and forgettable .
" On the other hand , Shubhra Gupta of The Indian Express rated the film 3 ( out of 5 stars ) and in a positive review , remarked that it " squeezes past its creaky tropes and partial squelchiness by some smart casting choices , and perky performances . "
Rohit Bhatnagar of Deccan Chronicle rated the film 2.5 ( out of 5 ) stars and thought that it was " an easy , breezy , one - time watch . "
Meanwhile , Kunal Guha of Mumbai Mirror concluded that " while this one works as a breezy film on girl bonding , it gets a bit tedious while taking a stab at patriarchy " and stated " it almost seems like old wine in a new bottle . "
He gave the film 3 stars ( out of 5 ) .
Writing for Firstpost , Anna M.M. Vetticad described Veere Di Wedding as " an unapologetic commentary on the lives of women " ; Pradeep Menon ( also of Firstpost ) in a less favorable review
largely credited Kapoor Khan for " effortlessly anchor[ing ] this flawed but fun film .
"
Baradwaj Rangan , in a mixed review , called Veere Di Wedding " a plasticky but passable entertainer whose existence may not be the worst thing in the world . "
OVERSEAS Section::::Overseas .
Saeed Saeed of The National awarded the film 4 stars out of 5 and described it as " a fun , feisty and slightly ribald comedy but with a tender heart lurking not far beneath . "
Manjusha Radhakrishnan of Gulf News rated the film 3 ( out of 5 ) stars .
She was appreciative of Kapoor Khan 's performance and remarked that " Veere Di Wedding will go down as an engaging film that does n't hurt the eye . "
Shilpa Jamkhandikar of Reuters negatively stated " In terms of humor , " Veere Di Wedding " works well , but it stutters when it comes to the emotional conflicts , which feel unreal and contrived . "
A particular scene in which Bhasker 's character masturbates using a sex toy received a polarized response on social media ..
However , it was critically praised for its realistic portrayal of female sexuality .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Veere Di Wedding at Bollywood Hungama