PURE GENIUS Pure Genius ( originally titled Bunker Hill ) is an American medical drama television series created by Jason Katims , starring Augustus Prew and Dermot Mulroney .
The show was ordered at the CBS upfronts 2016 to air in the network 's 2016–17 TV schedule .
The series was picked up on May 13 , 2016 , and premiered on October 27 , 2016 .
On November 21 , 2016 , CBS announced that it would not order more episodes than the 13 episodes commissioned .
The production for the first season wrapped on December 15 , 2016 , and the remaining commissioned episodes were broadcast for the remainder of its run .
On May 17 , 2017 , Pure Genius was cancelled after one season by CBS .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
James Bell is a Silicon Valley billionaire who dreams of building a hospital with ultimate cutting - edge technology to treat rare and incurable diseases .
He partners with a maverick surgeon , Dr. Walter Wallace , who leads the effort in clearing out the bureaucracy of medicine , and focus on forward thinking , advancing technology , and saving lives — at no cost to the patient .
CAST AND CHARACTERS
* Augustus Prew as James Bell , a Silicon Valley tech billionaire who opens Bunker Hill .
* Dermot Mulroney as Dr. Walter Wallace
* Odette Annable as Dr. Zoe Brockett , double board - certified doctor of pediatrics and critical care .
* Reshma Shetty as Dr. Talaikha Channarayapatra , Neurosurgeon .
* Aaron Jennings as Dr. Malik Verlaine , head of the Ehub which does remote monitoring of patients .
* Ward Horton as Dr. Scott Strauss , a Catholic Priest * Brenda Song as Angie Cheng EPISODES RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
Pure Genius has received generally mixed reviews from television critics .
Review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 24 % " rotten " rating based on 21 professional reviews , while it holds a 78 % user ( non - critic ) rating .
The website 's consensus reads , " Pure Genius is weighed down by stereotypical doctor drama trappings , suffocating its chances of bringing anything compelling and entertaining to the genre .
"
Metacritic reported a score of 43 out of 100 based on 18 reviews , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
On IMDB Pure Genius holds a 7.3/10 rating based on 2301 user reviews .
RATINGS REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS