INJUSTICE 2 Injustice 2 is a fighting video game developed by NetherRealm Studios and published by
Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment .
It is the sequel to 2013 's .
The game was initially released in May 2017 for the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One ; a Microsoft Windows version was released later in November 2017 .
An expanded version of the game , titled Injustice 2 : Legendary Edition , was released in March 2018 for the PlayStation 4 , Xbox One , and Microsoft Windows .
Similar to the previous installment , a companion mobile app was released for Android and iOS devices .
A prequel comic book series of the same name , written by Tom Taylor , was also released beginning in April 2017 .
The core gameplay remains similar to its predecessor , albeit with minor adjustments to returning game mechanics .
Injustice 2 introduces a new feature called the Gear System , a loot - dropping system that rewards players with costume pieces and equipment that can be used to customize characters ' appearances and modify their abilities and stats .
According to developers , the idea for implementing a role playing game ( RPG)-style progression system into a fighting game had existed since before the fall of Midway Games , the original publisher for the Mortal Kombat series .
Director Ed Boon also sought to incorporate gameplay mechanics used by multiplayer shooter games , such as personalization , character creation , loot , and leveling up , into the fighting game genre , which led to the development of the Gear System .
Injustice 2 's storyline centers around Batman and his insurgency 's attempt to restore society after the fall of Superman 's regime ; however , the arrivals of the newly formed supervillain group " The Society " and the alien Brainiac forces Batman to consider freeing the imprisoned Superman to help combat the threats .
The game received positive reviews from critics , who praised its story , presentation , improved gameplay mechanics , abundance of in - game content , and character customization options , while criticizing its random loot and microtransaction systems .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
Injustice 2 is a fighting game in which players compete in one - on - one combat using characters from the DC Universe and other third - party franchises .
Using different combinations of directional inputs and button presses , players must perform basic attacks , special moves , and combos to try to damage and knock out the opposing fighter .
Injustice 2 retains numerous gameplay mechanics from Injustice : Gods Among Us , including environment interaction , stage transitions , clashes , and character traits .
The trait system , like before , provides a temporary buff or ability that compliments each character 's playstyle .
The super meter , which allows players to execute enhanced special moves and unlock powerful " super moves " when fully charged , also returns .
Players can expend meter to perform new techniques , such as an evasive forward roll , which provides a way to overcome enemy keep - away tactics , or an air recovery , which lets characters escape an opponent 's combo early .
Most environmental attacks , which were completely unavoidable in the first Injustice game , can now be blocked or dodged ; however , certain environmental attacks with large amounts of startup , such as throwing a car , remain unblockable .
Injustice 2 introduces a loot - dropping system , known as the " Gear System " , which offers character - specific costume pieces and equipment with status - altering effects .
The Gear System uses RPG - like mechanics to reward players with experience and loot after every match .
Every playable fighter is given four base stats : strength , defense , health , and ability , the latter of which impacts special attacks .
As players collect experience points and subsequently level up , their characters ' base stats will increase .
Players can enhance their base stats even further by equipping gear obtained through loot drops , which also lets players customize the look of their characters .
Rarer gear can include one or more bonus augmentations , which range from new visual effects for special moves to higher yields of in - game currency or experience points .
Players can receive additional bonuses by equipping their characters with all five pieces of a single gear set .
Gear comes in three varieties : equipment , shaders , and abilities .
Besides the random loot earned at the end of a fight , all three types of gear are available to purchase in loot crates , known as " Mother Boxes " , using in - game currency .
Each character has five equipment slots for donning new costume pieces , which include their head , torso , arms , legs , and an accessory ; two ability slots for equipping new or modified special attacks ; and one shader slot for altering their color scheme .
The game will also include five separate gear loadouts for each character , allowing players to switch between their setups at the beginning of each match .
The game also includes a microtransaction system .
Players can buy " Source Crystals " using real - world money to purchase cosmetic adjustments for fighters , such as premier skins and shaders , instead of waiting to obtain them through normal play .
Source Crystals can also be used to buy " Transform Gear " .
Transform Gear lets players apply the visuals of one piece of gear to another , allowing them to match their preferred stat modifiers with their preferred costume pieces .
Lastly , once players have reached Level 20 with at least one character , Source Crystals can be used to level up other characters to their maximum levels .
NetherRealm representatives clarified that any purchases made with Source Crystals are strictly cosmetic and offer no gameplay advantages .
In addition to the campaign , online , and arcade modes , Injustice 2 introduces a new " Multiverse " mode .
Similar to the " Living Towers " mode from NetherRealm 's previous title , Mortal Kombat X , the Multiverse allows players to travel through series of parallel worlds within the DC Universe and battle against opponents with various handicaps , stipulations , and goals .
Online multiplayer will feature the option to disable Gear System upgrades and modifications , reducing all base stats to their default levels , turning any equipped gear into purely cosmetic items , and providing more balanced gameplay for competitive matches .
Players can also form online " guilds " with up to 50 other players .
Guild members can collaborate to complete daily and weekly cooperative objectives to earn and share gear exclusive to guild gameplay and climb the worldwide leaderboards .
CHARACTERS Section::::Characters .
The base roster for Injustice 2 includes 28 playable fighters , consisting of both new and returning heroes and villains .
The game also features 10 additional characters available as downloadable content ( DLC ) .
New playable characters are listed below in bold .
* Aquaman * Atom * Atrocitus * Bane
* Batman * Black Adam
* Black Canary * Black Manta * Blue Beetle
* Brainiac * Captain Cold * Catwoman * Cheetah * Cyborg * Darkseid * Deadshot *
Doctor Fate
* Enchantress * Firestorm * Flash * Gorilla Grodd * Green Arrow * Green Lantern
* Harley Quinn
* Hellboy
* Joker * Poison Ivy * Raiden * Red Hood
* Robin / Nightwing
* Scarecrow
* Starfire * Sub - Zero * Supergirl * Superman * Swamp Thing *
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles
* Wonder Woman
Additionally , several characters are playable as " premier skins " , which transform characters from the existing roster into other characters from mostly DC Comics Universe with unique voices , dialogue , and in certain cases , altered normal / special / super moves and character powers .
* Bizarro
* Black Lightning * Grid * Flash ( Jay Garrick )
* Green Lantern ( John Stewart )
* Mr. Freeze * Power Girl * Reverse - Flash * Vixen * White Canary PLOT Section::::Plot .
Seven years after Superman 's defeat at the hands of the other Justice League , Batman and his collaborators are attempting to piece the world back together .
However , a new faction , the Society , composed of villains spearheaded by Gorilla Grodd , emerges and plans for world domination .
With several of his allies either victims of or collaborators with Superman 's failed regime , Batman is forced to create a new team to combat the Society .
He sends Black Canary , an alternate Green Arrow ( as that universe 's Green Arrow had been killed prior to the events of the first game ) , and Harley Quinn to combat them in Gorilla City , where Doctor Fate warns Green Arrow and Black Canary of an incoming threat towards the planet .
After defeating Grodd , the two are abducted by Brainiac , the true mastermind behind the Society .
Having previously collected and destroyed Krypton , he had intended to reclaim Superman , but became interested in adding Earth to his collection .
After Brainiac takes over Batman 's communications hub , Brother Eye , Batman searches for allies to combat him .
Catwoman , Batman 's double agent within the Society , frees Harley from Gorilla City .
Flash and a reformed Hal Jordan reunite before joining Batman , who sends the latter to Atlantis to gain Aquaman 's assistance .
Aquaman refuses to cooperate at first , but relents after Brainiac attacks Atlantis .
Meanwhile , Black Adam , Wonder Woman , and Supergirl plan to free the Regime .
When they witness Brainiac 's forces attacking Earth , they attempt to free Superman from his prison .
Desperate to stop Brainiac , Batman releases Superman from custody and forms an uneasy alliance with the Regime .
Cyborg , Catwoman , and Harley Quinn return to the Batcave to free Brother Eye from Brainiac 's control and coordinate civilian evacuation efforts .
Wonder Woman takes Supergirl to Metropolis , and openly challenges Batman 's plan .
When she comes close to killing Cheetah and Harley Quinn , Supergirl stops her and heads to the Fortress of Solitude to confront Superman on the matter , learning the truth of her cousin 's tyranny .
With several of Earth 's cities abducted , Brainiac prepares to eradicate the planet .
The alliance attempts to take on Brainiac 's ship , but his shields are too strong and he seemingly kills Superman in the process .
They concoct a plan to weaken Brainiac 's shields by using Aquaman 's trident as a conduit for the magic of the Rock of Eternity .
Grodd pursues Aquaman and Black Adam with a brainwashed Black Canary , Green Arrow , and Blue Beetle .
After Aquaman kills Grodd , the pair successfully weakens Brainiac 's shields enough for Batman and Supergirl to break in .
The two are captured , but Batman is rescued by Superman .
After Superman and Batman defeat a brainwashed Firestorm and Swamp Thing , they are confronted by Doctor Fate , who has turned into Brainiac 's servant by the Lords of Order .
Fate is defeated and his helmet is destroyed , removing the Lords ' influence .
However , he is impaled and killed by Brainiac .
After incapacitating Brainiac , Superman takes control of the ship .
He manages to restore most of Earth 's cities back to their original locations , while Metropolis and Coast City are lost permanently , and the cities from other planets are still intact .
The heroes are divided over Brainiac 's fate : Batman , Flash , Green Lantern , and Supergirl want to spare him in order to restore the rest of earth 's cities ( as well as find planets for unearthly cities to live on ) and find a way to get Metropolis & Coast City back ; Superman , Aquaman , Black Adam , and Wonder Woman want to kill him to eliminate his potential threat and use his ship to re - establish the Regime 's control over Earth .
After a brief argument , Batman attacks Superman with a gold kryptonite - laden dagger , and a battle ensues .
Batman and Superman defeat each other 's teammates before engaging in a final battle against each other in the Batcave .
The final battle has two endings , depending on which side the player chooses .
*
If Superman 's side is chosen , he defeats Batman and his allies , kills Brainiac , bonds with the ship , and reestablishes the Regime with the help of all of Brainiac 's captives .
He offers an imprisoned Supergirl the chance to join his army , claiming he restored the remaining cities and put Earth at peace .
When she refuses , Superman then brings out a mind - controlled Batman and explains that she will join one way or another .
*
If Batman 's side is chosen , Superman and his allies are defeated .
Batman depowers him with Kryptonite and imprisons him in the Phantom Zone , deciding to create a new Justice League with his allies and offering Supergirl membership within it .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Injustice 2 was announced by NetherRealm Studios and Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment on June 8 , 2016 .
Following the release of Injustice : Gods Among Us , NetherRealm Studios sought to do " something unexpected and long - term " for its sequel , as well as give players " a level of control that makes playing [ their ] games a truly personal experience .
"
Ed Boon also wanted to infuse various gameplay mechanics used by recent multiplayer shooter games , such as personalization , character creation , loot , and leveling up , into the fighting game genre .
According to producer Adam Urbano , the idea of creating a fighting game utilizing a role playing game - like progression system had been floating around the studio since before the fall of Midway Games , the original publisher for the Mortal Kombat series .
Due to the success of the original Injustice , which earned NetherRealm Studios the trust of Warner Bros. and DC Comics , the development team decided to pitch their progression concept for the sequel , which was approved , leading to the implementation of the Gear System .
The Gear System was designed to encourage players to develop unique personal playstyles , while consistently rewarding them for investing time into the game .
According to Senior Marketing Game Manager Brian Goodman , the developers wanted the Gear System to cater to both the casual and hardcore audiences .
They hoped that hardcore players would appreciate the different mechanics offered by the system and create new strategies and fighting styles for each character , while casual players would enjoy the variety of visual customization options .
NetherRealm also foresaw the potential issue with newer players being dominated by veteran players who have obtained rarer gear sets .
To address this , the developers attempted to implement various solutions , such as giving players the option to disable stat modifiers during matches and the ability to buy rarer gear through the assorted tiers of Mother Boxes .
A " balance team " was also consulted during development to try to prevent players from clustering around a small number of optimal builds .
NetherRealm Studios collaborated with DC Comics throughout Injustice 2s entire development process , including conceptualizing characters and determining the direction of the story .
As with Injustice : Gods Among Us , NetherRealm was afforded extensive freedom with DC Comics ' properties when designing characters .
Lead Designer John Edwards stated that all of their design ideas had to pass through DC Comics ' approval process ; though , the company had rarely rejected them .
This allowed the developers to create a large variety of costume variations and visually distinct items inspired by decades of source material .
" It 's a mutual respect , " explained Art Director Steve Beran .
" They respect what we do , and we respect all their characters .
We are fans of their characters and , I think , art - wise and design - wise , we put a lot of detail that hardcore fans will like .
We tried to really honor every character . "
Injustice 2 continues the storyline established in Injustice : Gods Among Us .
Unlike the previous game , which centered on a multi - universe conflict , the plot for Injustice 2 takes place entirely within the alternate , dystopian universe .
According to Injustice : Gods Among Us Cinematic Director Dominic Cianciolo , the story from the first installment provided a solid foundation for adapting the canonical histories of the game 's newer cast , allowing the writers to fit their stories within the Injustice universe .
The biggest challenge presented to the writers was extending the series ' narrative without repeating the core Batman versus Superman conflict .
This led to the inclusion of Brainiac as the game 's central antagonist , as there were few characters in the DC Universe that could top " Dictator Superman " as a foe for Batman .
According to Goodman , the playable characters were decided upon by NetherRealm Studios in collaboration with DC Comics , similar to the previous title .
The developers considered the characters ' lore , personalities , abilities , popularity , participation in the story , and relationships with other characters during the roster selection process .
Creative Director Ed Boon stated that Injustice 2s roster would contain more relatively obscure characters , since Injustice : Gods Among Us had covered most of DC Comics ' most notable figures .
He teased the possibility of third - party DLC characters , which were well - received in Mortal Kombat X , eventually resulting in the inclusions of Dark Horse Comics ' Hellboy and Mirage Studios ' Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles .
Due to the success of Scorpion in the previous installment , who was the most downloaded DLC fighter , Boon also entertained the likelihood of NetherRealm including other Mortal Kombat characters as downloadable content , leading to the inclusions of Sub - Zero and Raiden .
As with Scorpion , Sub - Zero and Raiden were given new costume designs by comic book artist Jim Lee .
Characters ' facial animations were created with a custom photogrammetry facial scanner , which utilized 44 DSLR cameras with 50 mm fixed lenses .
Character Art Lead Brendan George stated that 16 facial expressions were captured to create a single character ; the 16 scans then took two to three days to process through their workstations .
The data from their new scanner allowed the artists to produce a more advanced facial rig .
All motion capture was performed in - house at NetherRealm Studios in Chicago , Illinois .
According to Senior Technical Artist for Cinematics Andy Senesac , the animation team used four head - mounted camera systems in its motion capture shoots , each equipped with a choice of three different 4 mm , 5 mm , or wide - angled lenses that were used depending on the actor 's head shape .
The motion capture was then modified with manual animations to obtain the final result .
The online infrastructure for Injustice 2 utilizes the same rollback - based netcode introduced to Mortal Kombat X in its XL update .
An online multiplayer beta test for both the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One versions was announced on January 19 , 2017 , which began soon afterwards on January 24 and lasted until February 21 .
The game 's original soundtrack was composed primarily by Christopher Drake , with additional compositions from Richard Carle , Dan Forden , and Dynamedion .
Injustice 2 runs on the Mortal Kombat X engine ( Unreal Engine 3 ) , with the mobile version running on Unreal Engine 4 .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Injustice 2 released in North America on May 16 , 2017 ; Australia on May 17 , 2017 ; and most European countries including the United Kingdom on May 19 , 2017 , for PlayStation 4 and Xbox One .
Aside from the standard edition of the game , a Digital Deluxe Edition and an Ultimate Edition were available for purchase .
The Digital Deluxe Edition included three downloadable content ( DLC ) characters , the Power Girl premier skin , and one exclusive gear shader pack ; the Ultimate Edition included nine DLC characters , the Reverse - Flash , John Stewart , and Power Girl premier skins , and two exclusive gear shader packs .
Pre - orders of the game featured Darkseid as a playable DLC fighter .
On May 8 , 2017 ,
Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment announced the Injustice 2 Championship Series , a global eSports program .
The series offered amateur and professional players throughout North America , Europe , and Latin America a chance to compete in different programs for a portion of a prize pool .
These included the Injustice 2 Pro Series , an international tournament ; the GameStop Hometown Heroes tournament , set in the United States ; the Path to Pro tournament , set in Europe ; and the Liga Latina , set in Argentina , Chile , Mexico , and Peru .
The top players from each program qualified for the ELEAGUE Injustice 2 World Championship , which featured a prize pool .
The event took place in Atlanta , Georgia , from October 21 through November 10 , and was streamed worldwide through the ELEAGUE website , Twitch , and YouTube ; matches were also broadcast live on TBS in the United States .
On April 10 , 2018 , NetherRealm announced that the Pro Series would return for a second season .
On October 24 , 2017 , Warner Bros. announced that a Microsoft Windows version developed by QLOC , who had previously taken over development for Mortal Kombat X 's PC port from High Voltage Software , was due for release in Q4 2017 , with an open beta stage beginning on October 25 .
However , the beta was postponed for unspecified reasons , ultimately running between November 6 and November 11 .
The Microsoft Windows version was released on November 14 , 2017 .
Creative director Ed Boon has also discussed the possibility of a Nintendo Switch version .
MOBILE VERSION
Section::::Mobile version .
Like its predecessor , a free - to - play mobile app based on Injustice 2 was released for iOS and Android devices on May 11 , 2017 .
The app was soft launched in the Philippines App Store in February 2017 .
It maintains several gameplay features from the original , including the swipe - based fighting mechanics , card collection , and three - on - three battles , but introduces various changes to the game 's overall formula .
Players are now given the ability to move around the stage freely during combat , as well as use jumping and crouching attacks .
The stamina management system returns ; however , instead of each character receiving their own allotment of stamina , the player is given a single pool of stamina which depletes after every match .
Fights also require higher levels of stamina than the previous game .
The app includes login bonuses ; daily objectives , which offer experience and coins ; and achievements , which are long - term goals that reward players with premium gems and " hero shards " used for unlocking and leveling up characters .
It also features game mechanics similar to those found in the console versions , such as ability and gear upgrades .
The app includes a story mode , which will be released chapter by chapter in subsequent updates .
According to Google Play , the Android version of the app has been downloaded at least ten million times since its release .
DOWNLOADABLE CONTENT Section::::Downloadable content .
According to Boon , NetherRealm Studios planned to take a more " aggressive approach " for downloadable content in Injustice 2 compared to their previous games .
" One of the things we 've been doing , trying to do more and more with every game ... is to support it for a longer period of time , " Boon stated , " With DLC characters , we 've had four with Mortal Kombat , six with Injustice , eight with Mortal Kombat X , and with Injustice 2 we plan on continuing that pattern . "
On May 5 , 2017 , NetherRealm Studios announced Fighter Pack 1 , which includes three DLC characters : Red Hood , Starfire , and Mortal Kombats Sub - Zero .
Red Hood was released on June 13 , 2017 ; Sub - Zero was released on July 11 , 2017 ; and Starfire was released on August 8 , 2017 .
Fighter Pack 2 , consisting of Black Manta , Mortal Kombats Raiden , and Dark Horse Comics ' Hellboy , was revealed on August 23 , 2017 , at Gamescom .
Black Manta was released on September 12 , 2017 ; Raiden was released on October 3 , 2017 , alongside the Black Lightning premier skin ; and Hellboy was released on November 14 , 2017 .
On October 3 , 2017 , during the finale of The CW 's documentary television series Chasing the Cup : Injustice 2 , Atom was revealed as the next DLC addition .
The third DLC pack , Fighter Pack 3 , was unveiled during the finals of the ELEAGUE Injustice 2 World Championship on November 11 , 2017 , which includes Atom , Enchantress , and Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles ( TMNT ) protagonists
Leonardo , Donatello , Michelangelo , and Raphael .
Atom was released on December 12 , 2017 ; Enchantress was released on January 9 , 2018 ; and lastly , the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles were released on February 13 , 2018 .
Players can select which TMNT member to play as using the Gear System ; equipping one of four weapons — katana , bō , nunchaku , or sai — swaps between Leonardo , Donatello , Michelangelo , and Raphael , each with their own unique move sets .
In tournament and online modes , where Gear System loadouts can not be used , players can choose each turtle individually through the character select screen .
At one point , NetherRealm had considered developing a Fighter Pack 0 , which would consist of returning characters from Injustice : Gods Among Us , including Ares , Batgirl , Doomsday , and Shazam ; however , the idea did not come to fruition .
RELATED MEDIA Section::::Related media .
During NetherRealm Studios ' Injustice 2 panel at San Diego Comic - Con International on July 22 , 2016 , Boon announced a digital comic book series which will detail the backstory to the events of the game .
The series is written by Tom Taylor , who had previously worked on the tie - in comic books for Injustice : Gods Among Us .
Bruno Redondo is its lead artist , with contributing artwork from Juan Albarran , Daniel Sempere , and Mike S. Miller .
Beginning on April 11 , 2017 , the series was released in weekly chapters through various digital retailers , including ComiXology , Google Play Books , the Kindle Store , and DC Comics ' own mobile app .
Print versions became available for purchase on May 3 , 2017 , each containing multiple digital chapters .
LEGENDARY EDITION Section::::Legendary Edition .
On February 28 , 2018 ,
Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment announced Injustice 2 : Legendary Edition .
Similar to the Ultimate Edition for Injustice :
Gods Among Us , the Legendary Edition includes all previously released downloadable content for Injustice 2 .
It also introduces new features , such as an expanded tutorial system called the " Learn Hub " , new gear items , and an increased character level cap .
In addition , those who pre - order the Day One Edition of the Legendary Edition received a collectible coin , a steelbook case , a " comic exclusive download steel card " , and 11,000 Source Crystals to use in - game .
The Legendary Edition was released on March 27 , 2018 , for PlayStation 4 , Xbox One , and Microsoft Windows .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
Injustice 2 received generally favorable reviews , according to Metacritic .
Reviewers lauded Injustice 2 's story and presentation .
Eurogamer Wesley Yin - Poole praised the game 's narrative and visuals , describing them as " impressive " and a " significant step up " from Injustice : Gods Among Us .
Yin - Poole commended the story mode on a technical level , praising the motion capture , action choreography , voice acting , and facial animations .
Destructoid Nick Valdez shared similar views , stating that the visuals were " leagues above the first title " .
Valdez also complimented the game 's improved writing and " more engaging narrative " .
Metro claimed it had " probably the best single - player experience ever in a fighting game " .
In contrast , while Game Revolution James Kozanitis said the visuals were " absolutely jaw - dropping " and " set a new high bar for the [ fighting game ] genre " , he lambasted the story campaign , which he labeled as " poorly written " and " contrived " .
Reviewers also praised Injustice 2 improved gameplay mechanics and abundance of in - game content .
Game Informer Andrew Reiner praised the game 's faster walk speed , the additions of the evasive roll and air recovery maneuvers , and the ability to block environmental attacks , stating that the game " [ felt ] tighter as a whole " and " offers a higher level of strategy " .
The Games Machine Danilo Dellafrana stated that " the subtle changes to the combat system made for deeper gameplay " .
These points of praise were mirrored by IGN Darry Huskey , who remarked that Injustice 2
" [ struck ] a fine balance between retaining the strengths of Gods Among Us and making smart changes to improve mechanics . "
Huskey applauded the " incredible amount of content " , declaring that " hour for hour , Injustice 2 may have more content for solo players than any fighting game ever released . "
Reiner also praised the amount of content , acknowledging its " lengthy story - based campaign ... great fighting experience , and ... nearly endless supply of notable loot . "
Yin - Poole wrote that NetherRealm Studios " once again [ proved ] it 's the best in the business at that old chestnut : content . "
While the customization options offered by the Gear System received praise , critics expressed frustration with receiving random , undesired gear through loot drops and the game 's microtransaction system .
GameSpot Peter Brown found collecting gear and outfitting characters to be enjoyable , stating that " watching a character 's traditional outfit transform into something fresh or unexpected , and seeing their stats grow through leveling up and equipping gear , grants a satisfying sense of ownership over your accomplishments and possessions .
" On the other hand , Brown criticized the Gear System 's use of currency , particularly Source Crystals , saying that spending real money seemed to be a " necessary evil " for players to have complete control over their inventories .
Kotaku Mike Fahey described the ability to create custom versions of characters as " quite satisfying " ; however , he found the Gear System to be " complicated " and criticized the randomness in receiving desired costume pieces and equipment , uttering " sometimes random chance really sucks . "
VideoGamer.com Alice Bell also called the microtransaction and loot systems " needlessly complex " , which require players to keep track of several different types of currency .
In contrast , Polygon Michael McWhertor called the interface " elegant " , enjoying the simplicity of managing and selling of gear for each character .
SALES Section::::Sales .
Injustice 2 topped the United Kingdom 's multi - platform physical sales chart during its first two weeks after launch , with the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One versions simultaneously taking the first and second spots , respectively .
This marked the first time a fighting game had taken the top spot since Mortal Kombat X in April 2015 .
Launch sales for the game in the United Kingdom were also roughly one - third higher than the debut of Injustice :
Gods Among Us .
Likewise , Injustice 2 was the top - selling game across all platforms in Australia and New Zealand during its first two weeks , and the best - selling game in the United States for the month of May 2017 .
It became the PlayStation Store 's most downloaded PlayStation 4 title for May 2017 , with Darkseid being the third best - selling DLC of the month .
The Ultimate Pack and Fighter Pack 1 were both in the Top 10 downloads in June 2017 .
Three months later , Fighter Pack 2 also made the Top 10 .
By the end of May , Injustice 2 was the ninth best - selling game of 2017 .
Time Warner declared the game as " the highest - grossing console game in the second quarter of 2017 , " selling approximately 1.5 million copies in the first three months of its release .
AWARDS Section::::Awards .
In June 2016 , Injustice 2 received " Best of E3 2016 " awards for " Best Fighting Game " from the Game Critics Awards , IGN , Game Informer , and GamesRadar .
The game won " Best Fighting Game of 2017 " awards from The Game Awards 2017 , IGN , and Game Informer .
IGN also nominated the game for " Best Xbox One Game " and " Best Spectator Game " .
The game was nominated for " Best International Game " at the 2017 Ping Awards , for " Best Xbox One Game " in Destructoid Game of the Year Awards 2017 , and for " Best Multiplayer Game " and " Studio of the Year " ( NetherRealm ) at the Golden Joystick Awards .
In Game Informers Reader 's Choice Best of 2017
Awards , the game came in first place for " Best Fighting Game " , third place for " Best Competitive Multiplayer " and fifth place for " Game of the Year " .
EGMNow ranked it eleventh on their list of the 25 Best Games of 2017 , while GamesRadar+ ranked it 23rd on their list of the 25 Best Games of 2017 .
The game was also nominated for " Outstanding Achievement in Sound Design " , and won the award for " Fighting Game of the Year " at the D.I.C.E. Awards ; it was also nominated for " Game , Franchise Fighting " at the 17th Annual National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers Awards .
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS