CALL ME BY YOUR NAME ( NOVEL ) Call Me by Your Name is a 2007 novel by American writer André Aciman that centers on a blossoming romantic relationship between an intellectually precocious and curious 17-year - old American - Italian Jewish boy named Elio Perlman and a visiting 24-year - old American Jewish scholar named Oliver in 1980s Italy .
The novel chronicles their summer romance and the 20 years that follow .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
The narrator , Elio Perlman , recalls the events of the summer of about 1983 , when he was seventeen and living with his parents in Italy .
Each summer , his parents would take in a doctoral student as a house guest for six weeks , who would revise a book manuscript while assisting his father with academic paperwork .
Elio resents the tradition , as it requires him to vacate his bedroom so the guest can use it for the duration of their stay .
Oliver , the guest for the summer , is carefree and detached — a stark contrast to Elio 's introversion .
Elio selected Oliver as a guest in the hopes of " instant affinities " between them and acts as his tour guide , though Elio 's attempts to impress Oliver are met with indifference .
When Oliver grabs Elio 's arm after a tennis match , Elio retracts in fear .
Though Elio recognizes his own bisexuality and his attraction to Oliver — he is particularly excited by his discovery that Oliver is Jewish , seeing it as a bond between them — he doubts that Oliver reciprocates his feelings .
One day , Elio sneaks into Oliver 's room , and masturbates while wearing Oliver 's swimming trunks .
Later , Elio confesses his attraction to Oliver , and they kiss on a berm where Claude Monet had supposedly painted some of his pictures .
When Elio touches Oliver 's penis through his clothes , Oliver pushes him away .
Oliver and Elio grow distant in the subsequent days .
Elio begins an affair with Marzia , a local girl around his own age .
Seeking reconciliation , Elio slips a note under Oliver 's bedroom door , with a plan to meet at midnight .
At midnight , Elio enters Oliver 's room , where they have sex .
Elio feels guilty about the encounter , and decides that he can not continue his relationship with Oliver .
The next morning , Oliver wears Elio 's bathing suit to breakfast — mirroring Elio 's earlier fetishistic behavior — and later performs oral sex on Elio .
Elio realizes that his attraction to Oliver persists , and that he wishes to continue their relationship .
Elio visits Marzia 's house , and the two have sex ; in the afternoon he masturbates with a cut peach , and ejaculates inside of it .
Oliver later visits Elio 's room , eats the peach and its contents , and again has sex with Elio .
Before returning to the United States , Oliver decides to spend three days in Rome , where he is accompanied by Elio .
Upon returning from the trip , Elio is saddened to find that his belongings have already been returned to his original bedroom , and that all traces of Oliver 's visit have vanished .
Elio has a discussion with his father , who says that he approves of the friendship ( and relationship ) between Elio and Oliver .
That Christmas , Oliver again visits the Perlman family , and announces that he intends to marry next summer .
Oliver and Elio fall out of touch , and do not communicate with each other for many years .
Fifteen years later , Elio visits Oliver in the United States , where Oliver is now a professor .
Elio is unwilling to meet Oliver 's wife and children , admitting that he still feels attraction towards Oliver and jealousy towards his new family .
Oliver admits that he has followed Elio 's academic career , and shows him a postcard that he brought with him when he left Italy and has kept over the years .
During a final meeting at a bar , Elio and Oliver muse that people can lead two parallel lives — one in reality , and one a fantasy that is denied to them by external forces .
Twenty years after their first meeting and one year before the narrator 's present , Oliver visits Elio 's family home in Italy .
They recall their time together ; Elio informs Oliver that his father has died , and that he has spread his ashes all over the world .
The novel concludes with Elio , as the narrator , remarking to the reader that if Oliver remembered everything as he says he did , he should once more " look me in the face , hold my gaze , and call me by your name . "
RECEPTION REVIEWS Section::::Reception .
Section::::Reviews .
Reviewing Call Me by Your Name for The New York Times , Stacey D'Erasmo called the novel " an exceptionally beautiful book " .
Writing in The New Yorker , Cynthia Zarin said , " Aciman 's first novel shows him to be an acute grammarian of desire " .
In The Washington Post , Charles Kaiser said , " If you have ever been the willing victim of obsessive love — a force greater than yourself that pulls you inextricably toward the object of your desire — you will recognize every nuance of André Aciman 's superb new novel , ' Call Me by Your Name . ' " SALES Section::::Sales .
According to Nielsen BookScan , , the book has sold 33,376 copies for £ 252,675 in the United Kingdom .
In early November 2017 , the book went from 618 copies sold to 1,164 , an 88 % jump in volume week on week .
It reached 2,012 copies sold for the week ending February 3 .
AWARDS
Section::::Awards .
At the 20th Lambda Literary Awards , the novel won the award for Gay Fiction .
FILM ADAPTATION Section::::Film adaptation .
A film adaptation directed by Luca Guadagnino and starring Timothée Chalamet as Elio , Armie Hammer as Oliver , and Michael Stuhlbarg as Elio 's father was released on November 24 , 2017 , in the United States to critical acclaim .
At the 90th Academy Awards , it was nominated for Best Picture , Best Actor ( Chalamet ) , Best Original Song ( " Mystery of Love " by Sufjan Stevens ) , and Best Adapted Screenplay ( James Ivory ) , winning the latter .
AUDIOBOOK Section::::Audiobook .
The audiobook was read in 2017 by Hammer and published by Macmillan Publishers .
SEE ALSO
* List of fiction works made into feature films ( 0–9 and A – C )
REFERENCES