ESCAPE THE NIGHT Escape the Night is an American postmodern metafictional murder - mystery reality web series hosted by Joey Graceffa that premiered on June 22 , 2016 on YouTube Premium .
The third season was released on June 21 , 2018 .
The series is produced by Brian Graden Media .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
The series follows The Savant ( Joey Graceffa ) as he finds himself in an estate in a past era , where he invites a number of guests to a party which requires them to act and dress as various personas from that era .
Once there , they 're cut off from the outside world , challenged to survive the night and escape the estate .
To do this , the guests team up with him to participate in challenges and escape room puzzles , competing with each other to escape from the historical era by solving and completing them .
At the end of each episode , two guests are voted into a challenge to compete against each other , where the losing guest is eliminated via a fictional death until one or more guests ultimately win and are sent back to the modern world .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
On October 2015 , YouTube announced YouTube Red , a paid subscription service that would allow streaming videos ad - free , downloading videos for offline usage , and present new exclusive original series for YouTube Red subscribers .
At the time of announcement , ten various series were announced for 2016 , including the Untitled Joey Graceffa project , which was set to be produced by Brian Graden Media .
The series began filming near Valencia , California .
On June 15 , 2016 , Graceffa released the trailer for his original series entitled Escape the Night , which was set and released on June 22 , 2016 with two episodes going live .
When interviewed after production , Graceffa commented that the idea behind Escape the Night was inspired by an episode themed around murder mystery appearing on television show Lizzie McGuire , and closely related to the 1985 film Clue .
Furthermore , Graceffa shared his experience with filming the series , expressing " It was a really fun concept to put together , " additionally mentioning , "
And it was an idea that started small and ended up into something much bigger . "
On October 17 , 2016 , it was announced by Susanne Daniels , global head of content for YouTube , at MIPCOM that Escape the Night would be renewed for a second season .
Later on October 31 , 2016 , Joey Graceffa via Twitter announced the cast of the second season and scheduled its debut to be on June 22 , 2017 .
On May 24 , 2018 , Joey Graceffa announced the third season via Twitter .
On May 28 , 2018 through June 1 , 2018 , Joey Graceffa confirmed via Twitter he would be releasing the cast of season three periodically .
The third season debuted on June 21 , 2018 .
CAST AND CHARACTERS SEASON 1 ( 1920S ) Section::::Cast and Characters .
Section::::Season 1 ( 1920s ) . !
Name ! !
Role ! !
Eliminated Joey Graceffa
The Savant
Eva Gutowski
The Journalist
RECURRING CHARACTERS
* David Hutchison as Marvin the Groundskeeper * Katia Hayes as Sarah
the Maid * Paul Chirico as Arthur the Butler
SEASON 2
( THE VICTORIAN ERA )
Section::::Season 2 ( The Victorian Era ) . !
Name ! !
Role ! !
Eliminated Joey Graceffa
The Savant Episode 10
RECURRING CHARACTERS
* Lindsay Elston as Alison
* Eva Augustina Sinotte as The Sorceress SEASON 3
( 1970S )
Section::::Season 3 ( 1970s ) . !
Name ! !
Role ! !
Eliminated Matthew PatrickThe Detective
Joey Graceffa
The Savant
Nikita DragunThe Troublemaker
Manny Mua
The Record Producer Episode 9 Rosanna Pansino
The Jet Setter Episode 8 Safiya Nygaard
The Investigative Reporter Episode 7
Colleen Ballinger
The Disco Dancer Episode 6 Teala Dunn
The Super Spy Episode 4 Roi Fabito
The Daredevil Episode 3 JC Caylen
The Hippie Episode 2 EPISODES SEASON 1 ( 2016 )
SEASON 2 ( 2017 )
SEASON 3 ( 2018 )
SPECIALS ( 2016–2018 ) GAME CHARTS PROGRESS CHART ( SEASON 1 ) Section::::Game Charts .
Section::::Progress chart ( Season 1 ) . !
colspan="12
" Progress Chart !
Guest!!1!!2!!3!!4!!5!!6!!7!!8!!9!!10!!Cause of Death !
Joey !
Eva !
Oli !
Lele !
Tim !
Matt !
Sierra !
GloZell !
Justine !
Andrea !
Shane * ¹
Shane knew about the evil and told Sarah the maid that he knew .
The evil saw him as a threat and poisoned him .
The other guests had fifteen minutes to save him , but they failed , and he died as a result .
* ² Lele and Joey were voted into a challenge , and they had to choose a guest to die .
They chose to betray Glozell .
PROGRESS CHART ( SEASON 2 ) Section::::Progress chart ( Season 2 ) . !
colspan="12
" Progress Chart !
Guest !
1!!2!!3!!4!!5!!6!!7!!8!!9!!10!!Cause of Death !
Tyler !
Andrea !
Joey !
Alex !
Gabbie !
Tana !
Liza !
DeStorm !
Jesse !
Lauren
* ¹ Gabbie and Tana were voted into the challenge and had to compete to save Jesse and DeStorm .
But it turns out Jorogumo did not want to kill one of the girls , but wanted one of the guys .
Gabbie won and chose to save DeStorm over Jesse .
* ² Joey and Andrea were voted into a challenge , and they had to choose a guest to die .
They chose to betray Tana .
* ³ Everyone had to compete in this challenge , with whoever finished last being the one to die .
Andrea ended up finishing last , but Alison ( assistant to the guests ) sacrificed herself so that she could live .
PROGRESS CHART ( SEASON 3 ) Section::::Progress chart ( Season 3 ) . !
colspan="12
" Progress Chart !
Guest!!1!!2!!3!!4!!5!!6!!7!!8!!9!!10!!Cause of Death !
Joey !
Matthew !
Nikita !
Manny !
Rosanna !
Safiya !
Colleen !
Teala !
Roi !
JC
* ¹ Matt lost a challenge to Manny and was beaten to death and strangled by The Strong Man .
He was later revived by Safiya and Joey using the Lazarus Harp .
* ² Safiya And Rosanna were the only two eligible to vote .
Safiya voted for Nikita while Ro voted for Manny .
In a surprising turn of events , the person who voted for the winner of the challenge ended up being killed .
Since Nikita won the challenge , Safiya was fishhooked .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Common Sense Media 's critical consensus reads , " Web celebs star in mediocre pseudo - reality horror series " , while giving the show a rating of 2/5 .
SEE ALSO
* Whodunnit ?
( 2013 U.S. TV series )
* Murder in
Small Town X *
Scared Famous ( TV series )
*
The Quest ( 2014 TV series )
* Busted !
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Series playlist on YouTube