ADAM MAXTED Adam Maxted ( born 27 March 1992 ) is a Northern Irish professional wrestler and former contestant on ITV2 show Love Island .
Having been a contestant on Series two of Love Island , having entered at day 11 , Maxted paired up with Katie Salmon and finished the series in fourth position .
LOVE ISLAND Section::::Love Island .
In 2016 , Maxted was selected to be a part of the second series of ITV 's Love Island ; where he appeared from the 11th day , until the end , selecting fellow contestant Katie Salmon as his date .
The pair ended the series in fourth place , behind eventual winners , Nathan and Cara .
However , later after the show had ended , Maxted proclaimed he was " 100 % Single " , comparing Katie to a Kebab , commenting on Twitter
" It 's like when you 're eating a kebab after a night out and the first few bites taste good
but then you realise that it really is n't nice at all ! "
PROFESSIONAL WRESTLING CAREER
EARLY CAREER ( 2016–2017 ) Section::::Professional wrestling career .
Section::::Early career ( 2016–2017 ) .
Maxted left Love Island and continued his wrestling training , eventually earning his debut match in August 2016 , at Southside Wrestling , being defeated by Joseph Connors .
Maxted later had matches for Preston City Wrestling , Over The Top Wrestling , and 4 Front Wrestling , in 2017 .
In May 2017 , Maxted was called up to have his first WWE Tryout , in the O2 Arena .
Maxted had his first championship matches , competing for the All - Ulster Title and challenging Josh Knott for the Pro Wrestling Pride Catch Division Championship .
He then made trips to France , and Pakistan , where he challenged for the PWE World Heavyweight Title .
In November 2017 , Maxted won the All England Championship , defeating Earl - Black Junior .
In 2018 , after signing for 5 Star Wrestling , he appeared on FreeSports , where he and Charlie Sterling won the 5 * Tag Team Championship .
WORLD OF SPORT ( 2018-PRESENT ) Section::::World of Sport ( 2018-Present ) .
On August 4th 2018 he made his debut for World of Sport , he teamed up with Nathan Cruz to take on Doug Williams and HT Drake in the WOS Tag Team Title Tournament .
Maxted and Cruz went on to defeat the team of Grado and Davey Boy Smith Jr to advance to the finals , however they we 're unsuccessful to become the 1st Tag Team Champions , losing the final to Kip Sabian and Lestyn Rees .
Nathan Cruz then betrayed Maxted shortly after .
On the August 24th , episode 5 , Maxted defeated Cruz in a Ladder Match which who ever loses must leave WOS forever .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Following Love Island , Maxted entered into a relationship with fitness instructor Carly Taylor .
CHAMPIONSHIPS AND ACCOMPLISHMENTS
* 5 Star Wrestling * 5
Star Wrestling :
Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) -
with Charlie Sterling * Big League Wrestling * BLW Tag Team Championship ( 1 time , current ) - with Chris Andrews * International Pro Wrestling United Kingdom * All England Championship ( 1 time )
* Southside Wrestling Entertainment * SWE European Championship ( 1 time , current )
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Adam Maxted on Cagematch
*
Adam Maxted official FaceBook