DEAD BY DAYLIGHT Official Dead
By Daylight Wiki Dead by Daylight is an asymmetric survival horror game developed and published by Behaviour Interactive .
Dead by Daylight was released on the Microsoft Windows operating system in June 2016 , and released on the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One home consoles in June 2017 .
The game is played exclusively as a one versus four ( 1 v. 4 ) online multiplayer where one player takes on the role of the savage Killer , and the other four players play as Survivors , trying to escape the Killer and avoid being caught and sacrificed to the Entity .
Among a handful of original Characters , the game also includes unlockable and downloadable ( DLC ) Characters .
Characters from the Halloween , The Texas Chainsaw Massacre , A Nightmare on Elm Street , and Saw horror franchises are featured .
A spiritual successor , Identity V , developed by NetEase and co - developed by Behaviour Interactive , was released for mobile devices in China in early 2018 , and was released worldwide in July 2018 .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
A group of up to four Survivors must elude one Killer .
The Survivors ' perspectives are third - person , while the Killer 's perspective is first - person .
SURVIVORS Section::::Survivors .
Players assume the role of one of the 14 Survivors , Dwight Fairfield , Meg Thomas , Claudette Morel , Jake Park , Nea Karlsson , Laurie Strode , William ' Bill ' Overbeck , Ace Visconti , Feng Min , David King , Quentin Smith , David Tapp , Kate Denson , Adam Francis or Jeff Johansen .
The goal of the Survivors is to escape the enclosed area , which can be done in one of two ways : either by repairing a certain number of disabled Generators ( always one Generator more than the amount of Survivors that spawned into the trial ) to provide power to the switch boxes of two Exit Gates leading out of the trial grounds ; or by escaping through the Hatch .
The Hatch appears when the number of repaired Generators exceeds the number of Survivors that are still alive by one , and opens only when there is only one Survivor remaining in the trial .
The Survivors will need a key to open the Hatch if there are more than one person alive .
The Survivor 's movement options consist of sprinting , walking , crouch - walking or crawling .
They must elude the Killer by losing their line of sight in a chase or by successfully hiding from them .
KILLERS Section::::Killers .
As the Killer , players assume the role of either the Trapper , the Wraith , the Hillbilly , the Nurse , the Shape , the Hag , the Doctor , the Huntress , the Cannibal , the Nightmare , the Pig , the Clown , the Spirit or the Legion .
Most Killers only have one form of locomotion , moving at a fast pace , which is moderately faster than the pace of a sprinting Survivor .
When hunting the Survivors , the Killer must capture them by either striking them twice with their Weapon ( the first hit reduces the Survivor to the Injured State and pushes them a short distance ahead of the Killer , while the second hit drops them to crawling on the ground ) or grabbing them in one move by either catching them inside Lockers , while attempting to vault over Pallets or through Windows ( these work only when the Survivor is injured ) , while repairing a Generator , trying to rescue a fellow Survivor from a Hook or attempting to escape through the Hatch .
Some Killers have secondary attacks that deal double - damage and put Survivors into the Dying State in one strike .
The Killer 's goal is to sacrifice Survivors to the Entity , a malevolent being which rules over the Realm in which Dead by Daylight takes place .
Caught Survivors are put onto Meathooks located throughout the trial grounds , which starts the sacrifice process , which will take 2 minutes to complete without any outside influences .
Some special Add - ons , Perks or the ' Memento Mori ' Offerings allow the Killer to bypass the sacrifice process and kill a Survivor directly , with a special animation .
The first time a Survivor is hooked , they enter the first phase .
In this phase only , the Survivor can try for a low ( 4 % ) chance of escaping from the Hook at the cost of tremendously accelerating the sacrifice process upon failure to escape .
Hooked Survivors can also be rescued by fellow Survivors .
If the Survivor escapes or is saved and eventually hooked a second time , they will enter the ' struggle phase ' , in which the Survivor has to resist the Entity trying to stab them by rapidly pressing the Spacebar , X , or A , depending on the platform , until they are either saved by an ally or killed by the ' Entity ' .
If the Survivor is saved during the ' struggle phase ' and is hooked a third time , they will die instantly with no opportunity of survival .
The Killer , despite walking at a fast pace , is slower than Survivors in most other movements : after striking a Survivor , the Killer will slow their movement to wipe the blood off of their Weapon .
The Killer is also slower in vaulting through Windows and can not leap over Pallets Survivors can throw down into their path , but instead have to go around the spot or spend some time destroying them .
The Killer also has an Aura - reading ability , constantly revealing the location of Generators , Hex Totems and in case of carrying a Survivor , Hooks across the Map .
A new mechanic was added in Patch 1.5.0 , which introduced ' Bloodlust ' .
15 seconds into a chase , the Killer receives a boost of 0.2 m / s to their base movement speed ; 30 seconds into a chase grants the Killer a 0.4 m / s boost ; and finally , if a chase lasts for 45 consecutive seconds , the Killer receives a 0.6 m / s boost .
Bloodlust only lasts until a chase ends after which the movement speed boost will degrade at a rate of 10 % per second spent not chasing a Survivor , with breaking a Pallet or injuring a Survivor instantly removing it completely .
PERKS Section::::Perks .
Survivors and Killers each have the option to utilise up to four Perks in their load - out , that give their Characters special abilities .
Each Survivor starts off with a set of three Perks that are unique to them and must first be unlocked before the other Survivors can use them .
There are also Perks that can be obtained by any Character , such as Kindred , Small Game , etc .
These perks can be unlocked and upgraded in the Bloodweb using Bloodpoints and each Bloodweb can only hold up to two perks .
These perks can range from giving a burst of speed when running from the Killer , to being able to self - heal without a first aid kit , to unlocking the ability to sabotage meat hooks without a toolbox .
There are also a multitude of ' universal ' perks that are available to unlock by any Survivor .
GENERAL GAMEPLAY Section::::General Gameplay .
In dealing with the Killer , Survivors can also make use of a handful of Items – searching Chests inside buildings will sometimes yield Med - Kits ( which allow the Survivors to heal themselves rather than wait for a teammate ) , Flashlights ( which can be used to temporarily blind the Killer and rescue a Survivor that the Killer is carrying ) , Toolboxes ( which can be used both to repair Generators faster and to temporarily sabotage Hooks and Bear Traps ) , Keys ( do a variety of things depending on their Add - ons and may be used to open the Hatch ) , Maps ( which track objectives and reveal their Auras ) .
One resource that Survivors can use are massive wooden Pallets , which are placed upright , and can be pulled down when a Survivor runs past them – if the Killer is right behind them , the Pallet will momentarily stun the Killer if it successfully hits them .
Other technical advantages that Survivors have include the ability to see the Aura of downed and hooked teammates – thus easily drawing them to their location for a rescue – and can similarly see the locations of newly repaired Generators and the Exit Gates for a short period of time once all necessary Generators are repaired .
When the Killer is near , the Survivors will hear a heartbeat , and eventually tense music , both of which increase in intensity with proximity to the Killer .
They can also see a red light ( called the " red stain " ) emanating from the Killer 's head , which reveals the direction which they are facing .
OBJECTIVES Section::::Objectives .
Interacting with most objects and actions in the game causes random Skill Checks to trigger .
Right before a skill check triggers , the player will receive a noise notification , and a needle within a circle will then appear on - screen .
The player must hit the action button , when the needle is within a certain randomly chosen section of the circle before the needle passes it .
The player can hit either a Good Skill Check or A Great Skill Check .
Hitting a Good Skill Check grants 50 Bloodpoints , and a Great Skill Checks grants 150 Bloodpoints and an instant 2 % bonus to progression on the generator .
Failing a Skill Check has multiple consequences based on the action being taken .
Repairing each Generator takes a lengthy period of time and makes a rather small mechanical noise during the process .
Failing a repair Skill Check will cause an explosion that will set the progress of the Generator repair back and make a loud noise alerting the Killer to the Survivor 's location .
Killers have the ability to damage Generators , which will regress them over time .
Sabotaging a Hook takes a significantly shorter amount of time than repairing a Generator but is considerably louder .
To sabotage a Hook , Survivors must be equipped with a ' Toolbox ' or have the Saboteur
Perk active .
Skill Checks are more common during this action than when repairing a Generator .
Failing a Sabotage Skill Check makes a loud banging sound , momentarily halting progress and alerting the Killer .
Sabotaged Hooks will respawn after three minutes have elapsed .
Special Event Hooks and the Basement Hooks can not be sabotaged .
Healing yourself or your allied Survivors can take drastically different lengths of time depending on multiple factors such as if they have a Med - Kit , certain Perks active , Killer de - buffs and whether the Survivor is healing themselves or an ally .
Skill Checks are as common as when repairing but have a slightly less severe consequence when failed .
Failing a Healing Skill Check still reduces the progress of the action but the wail made by the Survivor being healed is quieter than the other explosions and bangs , but still alerts the Killer of the location within a certain range .
If a Survivor is caught by the Killer , they are picked up and usually carried to the nearest Hook .
During this time they can attempt to wiggle out of the Killer 's grasp before they reach the Hook , and attempt to run away .
If the Killer succeeds in impaling a Survivor on one of the many Hooks in the area , a teammate can rescue the impaled Survivor or , more rarely , the impaled Survivor ( with a 4 % chance ) can rescue themselves from the Hook ( although attempting this is likely to backfire and injure the Survivor further , drawing them closer to death ) .
Once all Generators are repaired , a Survivor must find a switch next to one of two Exit Gates and hold it for 20 seconds in order to open the door .
The game only ends when all Survivors have either escaped or have been killed – thus , while some Survivors may escape and finish early , those still inside must keep playing .
Players who have escaped or died have the ability to observe the remaining players through the game 's conclusion , or return to the menu and join a new game .
If only one Survivor remains then repairing Generators can become nearly impossible .
An alternative escape method would be to use the ' Hatch ' , which spawns in a random area after the number of Generators repaired equals one more than there are Survivors left alive in the game ( i.e. three Generators repaired with only two Survivors still living ) .
The Hatch spawns closed but when only one Survivor remains then it will open automatically .
While closed it can be opened if one Survivor has a ' Dull Key ' or a ' Skeleton Key ' and will remain open for 30 seconds , allowing any remaining Survivors to hop in and escape .
BLOODWEB
Section::::Bloodweb .
Both Survivor and Killers are able to unlock Items , Perks , Add - ons and Offerings through the Bloodweb .
Every action performed in a trial awards the player a number of Bloodpoints , and the sum are added to the player 's total at the end of the trial .
Each level of the Bloodweb is procedurally generated , and gets larger as the Character gains levels .
The rewards are connected to each other in a radial tree , and players must purchase rewards along the progression path to gain access to others .
Once every reward on the tree has been purchased , the Bloodweb will generate a new level for the player to progress to , increasing that Character 's level .
Once the Character reaches Level 50 , they will be given the option to prestige .
While given the option , they will still be able to buy things from the Bloodweb , but will not further increase their Level .
Once prestiged , Characters will reset their progression and receive one of their default customisation options in a blood - splattered variation .
One can prestige their Character up to three times .
The Bloodweb may contain Items and their Add - ons , Offerings that can be spent at the start of the round to influence the trial 's conditions , and Perks that make the Character more powerful .
Offerings and Add - ons may only be used in one trial , whereas Items can be re - used until the player dies , uses up all the charges of an Item or gives it to another player .
Items can also be acquired from Chests on the map , but this does not affect the Character 's Bloodweb .
SETTING
REALMS Section::::Setting . Section::::Realms .
The game takes place across eleven Realms which are based on the places the Killers became murderers : The MacMillan Estate ( Trapper ) , Autohaven Wreckers ( Wraith ) , Coldwind Farm ( Hillbilly ) , Crotus Prenn Asylum ( Nurse , Clown ) , Haddonfield ( Shape ) , Backwater Swamp ( Hag ) , Léry 's Memorial Institute ( Doctor ) , the Red Forest ( Huntress ) , Springwood / Badham Preschool ( Nightmare ) , Gideon Meat Plant ( Pig ) , Yamaoka Estate ( Spirit ) , and the Ormond Slopes Resort ( Legion ) .
Over time , the evilness of their actions accumulated there until it attracted the attention of the Entity , an unknown force of darkness from a place with no name .
Most Realms are split into multiple Maps with similar features but small variations .
BUILDINGS Section::::Buildings .
Every Realm and Map features a map - specific building or landmark that remains in the same place in the map every game .
Every map except also features a building known as ' The Shack ' which is the same throughout all maps and appears a different one of a few predetermined locations in the map , with the exception of the two indoor maps , Léry 's Memorial Institute and Gideon Meat Plant .
Every new game , a room known as the ' Basement ' is placed under either the map - specific building or the shack .
The Basement is a special room consisting of one item chest for the Survivors to scavenge in , and four cabinets for them to hide in .
It 's also home to a special four - pointed hook that can not be destroyed or tampered with in any way by Survivors .
The basement only has one way in and one way out , making it a very secure place for Killers to bring their victims without fear of other Survivors saving them .
Because of this danger , Survivors are awarded a small number of points for even venturing into the basement .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The Entity , a supernatural being hailing from the ancient blood web , is awakened from its slumber whenever it is summoned by actions of great violence and malice .
The Killers , exclusively serial murderers , are pulled out of reality by it and convinced to do its bidding .
In order to maintain its existence , the Entity requires sacrifices , and demands that they hunt and kill the Survivors so it can feed off their hope and steal a piece of their soul upon death .
Then they are brought back to life to repeat the trial , endlessly attempting to escape .
The Survivors are pulled into the Entity 's constructed world when they wander too close to the places the Killers were taken from , disappearing from the real world without a trace .
They end up at a lonely campfire , where they rest between trials , until a Killer pursues them again .
Each trial takes place in a series of realms constructed by the Entity of areas from where the Killers were taken .
The Survivors ' only hope of escape is to complete a series of generators scattered throughout each realm to power up large gates to escape .
If the Killer has killed all but one Survivor , the Entity will offer the latter a final means of escape in the form of a hatch .
Escaping from the grounds always takes the Survivors back to the campfire , and offerings can be created to be burnt at it and appeal for the Entity 's favour .
Since the Entity feeds off the hope of the Survivors to escape , it helps them just as much as the Killers , acting as an impartial observer of the hunt , stepping in only to claim those hung on its hooks .
DOWNLOADABLE CONTENT Section::::Downloadable Content .
Behaviour Interactive has as of December 2018
released 12 individual DLC 's in total .
Each DLC has included both a new Survivor and Killer except for two that separately introduced one killer and one new survivor respectively ( Left Behind and LeatherFace DLC ) .
The DLC 's release with an average of three months interval between each one .
Prior to the release of every DLC , a so - called Public Test Build ( PTB ) is discharged , which allows the developers of the game to test and receive community feedback on the major upcoming changes .
Once the PTB has been out for roughly two weeks , it is removed for further maintenance , e.g. bug fixing , adding missing features etc .
before the DLC gets released .
The estimated time span between the opening of the Public Test Build and a new DLC 's release is approximately 2 - 3 weeks .
5 out of the 12 currently released DLC 's
have featured licensed Killers and Survivors from both popular horror franchises and other video games .
The DLC 's can be acquired in two ways ; by either purchasing them normally through Steam or buying them through an item - shop within the game using an in - game currency called Iridescent Shards .
This alternative way of obtaining the DLC 's was introduced in the 2.0 update ( Curtain Call DLC ) .
Each DLC has its own trailer and a so - called " spotlight " that exhibits the Killer and Survivor as well as a new in - game map that gets released along with the new characters . !
DLC title ! !
Date released ! !
New Killer ! !
New Survivor ! !
New Map COSMETICS Section::::Cosmetics .
Along with the Curtain Call DLC that was released on June 12 , 2018 , the developers also released a cosmetics store which allows you to use Iridescent Shards or Auric Cells .
In the store , players can use the Iridescent Shards or Auric Cells to buy cosmetics for their Survivors or Killers .
They would be able to buy a set chosen by the developers for a discount instead of individually buying it .
Licensed Survivors and Killers ( Shape , Cannibal , Pig , David Tapp and Laurie Strode etc . ) will not have any cosmetics released for them .
Although this procedure may seem like a way to make their Survivors or Killers more presentable , Auric Cells can only be bought with real money .
If the player wants to use Iridescent Shards , it would take a longer time .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Dead by Daylight received " mixed or average reviews " , according to review aggregator Metacritic .
GameSpot awarded it a score of 6 out of 10 , saying " Dead by Daylight executes the concept of a competitive horror game well , but only to a point . "
SEE ALSO
* Left 4 Dead * List of horror video games REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS