GOD OF WAR ( 2018 VIDEO GAME )
God of War is an action - adventure video game developed by Santa Monica Studio and published by Sony Interactive Entertainment ( SIE ) .
Released on April 20 , 2018 , for the PlayStation 4 ( PS4 ) console , it is the eighth installment in the God of War series , the eighth chronologically , and the sequel to 2010 's God of War III .
Unlike previous games , which were loosely based on Greek mythology , this installment is loosely based on Norse mythology , with the majority of it set in ancient Norway in the realm of Midgard .
For the first time in the series , there are two main protagonists : Kratos , the former Greek God of War who remains as the only playable character , and he is joined by his young son Atreus ; at times , the player may passively control him .
Following the death of Kratos ' second wife and Atreus ' mother , they journey to fulfill her promise to spread her ashes at the highest peak of the nine realms .
Kratos keeps his troubled past a secret from Atreus , who is unaware of his divine nature .
Along their journey , they encounter monsters and gods of the Norse world .
Described by creative director Cory Barlog as a reimagining of the franchise , a major gameplay change is that Kratos prominently uses a magical battle axe instead of his signature double - chained blades .
God of War also uses an over - the - shoulder free camera , with the game in one shot , as opposed to the fixed cinematic camera of the previous entries .
It includes role - playing video game elements , and Kratos ' son Atreus provides assistance in combat .
The majority of the original game 's development team worked on God of War and designed it to be accessible and grounded .
A separate short text - based game , , was released in February 2018 and follows Atreus on his first adventure .
God of War received universal acclaim from critics , being praised for its narrative , world design , art direction , graphics , characters , and combat system .
Many reviewers also felt that it had successfully revitalized the series without losing the core identity of its predecessors .
It received several perfect review scores , tying it with the original God of War as the highest - rated game in the series , as well as the fourth highest - rated PlayStation 4 game of all time on Metacritic .
It performed well commercially , becoming the best - selling game in the franchise with over seven million physical and digital copies sold within a month of release , also making it one of the best - selling PlayStation 4 games of all time .
God of War won several awards , including " Game of the Year " and " Best Game Direction " at The Game Awards 2018 and " Best Storytelling " and " PlayStation Game of the Year " at the 2018 Golden Joystick Awards , and received several nominations in other categories from both media outlets and industry ceremonies and events .
A novelization of the game was released in August 2018 , followed by a four - issue prequel comic series that began publication in November .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
The gameplay is vastly different from the previous installments , as it was rebuilt from the ground up .
Although the previous main installment , ( 2013 ) , introduced multiplayer to the series , this installment is single - player - only .
The game features a third - person , over - the - shoulder free camera , a departure from the previous installments , which featured a third - person , fixed cinematic camera ( with the exception of 2007 's 2D side - scroller ) .
Cinematographically , the game is presented in a continuous shot , with no camera cuts or loading screens .
The game is open , but it is not open - world .
Due to its openness , players can fast travel to different locations .
As the ability to swim was cut from the game , players instead use a boat to traverse bodies of water .
Jumping can now only be done at designated areas , such as a rock ledge .
Just like previous entries , there are puzzles for players to solve to progress through parts of the game .
Enemies in the game stem from Norse mythology , such as dark elves , wulvers , draugrs , as well as Gullveig and the revenants , beings warped by seiðr magic , among many others .
Valkyries appear as optional boss battles , and among the many side quests , players can free the imprisoned dragons Fáfnir , Otr , and Reginn — dwarfs that were turned into dragons — in addition to battling one called Hræzlyr , a story - based boss battle .
A major change is that Kratos no longer uses his signature double - chained blades , the Blades of Chaos , as his default weapon .
Instead , he uses a magical battle axe , called the Leviathan Axe , which is infused with ice elemental magic .
The axe can be thrown at enemies and magically summoned back to his hand ( similar to Thor 's hammer Mjölnir ) .
Larger enemies have precision targets and throwing the axe at those targets stuns the enemy .
The weapon can also be thrown at environmental objects to trigger a damaging explosion and it can freeze objects and some enemies in place for puzzle solving until the axe is summoned back to Kratos ' hand .
The axe has standard light and heavy attacks , and over time , it can be upgraded with runes to allow for special runic attacks , with one slot being for a light runic attack and the other for heavy .
This provides players with a variety of options to cater to their own play style .
For example , one of the light runic attacks allows Kratos to charge the axe and let out a burst of energy and one of the heavy runic attacks allows Kratos to summon a swirling ice storm .
Another new weapon that Kratos utilizes is the Guardian Shield .
When not in use , it folds up and appears like a vambrace on Kratos ' left forearm .
When summoned , the shield can be used offensively and defensively , similar to the Golden Fleece in previous games .
Kratos also utilizes hand - to - hand combat , a feature originally introduced in Ascension .
The Blades of Chaos , infused with fire elemental magic , are acquired late into the game via a plot device and perform similarly as they did in previous installments , but can also be upgraded with light and heavy runic attacks .
Similar to previous games , there is a " Rage " ability called Spartan Rage .
Like the previous versions , the Rage ability has a meter that gradually fills during combat .
With this ability , Kratos uses powerful bare - handed attacks , as opposed to weapons , to greatly damage enemies .
The game also features elements similar to role - playing video games ( RPGs ) .
There are crafting resources for the player to find that allow them to create new or upgrade existing armor with better perks .
Players also accumulate a currency called Hacksilver , a key component in crafting and purchasing new items .
Experience points ( XP ) are used for learning new combat skills .
Throughout the game world , players find chests containing random items , such as Hacksilver and enchantments for improving armor and weapons , as well as two special items , Iðunn 's Apples and Horns of Blood Mead , which increase the maximum length of the health and rage meters , respectively .
Quick time events have changed from previous games .
Enemies display two meters above their heads , one for health ( the color of which indicates the enemy 's difficulty ) and the other for stun .
Filling up the stun meter helps to defeat more difficult enemies .
When the stun meter is full , a grab - prompt will appear .
Depending on the enemy , Kratos may rip it in half or grab them and throw them into other enemies , among other possible outcomes .
Although the game is played entirely as Kratos , there are times when the player may choose to passively control Kratos ' son , Atreus .
One button is dedicated to Atreus and its use depends on the context .
For example , if the player needs assistance , they can look at an enemy , press the button , and Atreus will use his Talon Bow to shoot arrows at the enemy .
The arrows have little effect on an enemy 's health , but do increase the stun meter .
Over the course of the game , Atreus helps in combat , traversal , exploration , and puzzle - solving .
When facing a large number of enemies , he distracts the weaker ones as Kratos fights the stronger ones .
If too many enemies gang up on Atreus , he is knocked out for the remainder of that combat .
Just like Kratos , Atreus acquires new skills , armor , special arrows , such as lightning arrows , as well as runic attacks for his Talon Bow , but it only has one slot instead of two .
Atreus ' runic attacks summon different spectral animals with different abilities .
For example , one summons a wolf that attacks enemies , while another summons the squirrel Ratatoskr that will dig up orbs to replenish Kratos ' health or rage meters .
These orbs are also found throughout the game world and dropped by downed foes .
SYNOPSIS SETTING
Section::::Synopsis . Section::::Setting .
While the first seven games were loosely based on Greek mythology , this installment takes the series to Norse mythology .
Six of the nine realms of Norse mythology can be explored .
Predating the Vikings , the majority of the game takes place in ancient Norway in the realm of Midgard , inhabited by humans and other creatures and is the same realm that the Greek world had existed in .
As more creatures began appearing , many humans fled .
Other realms visited as part of the story include Alfheim , the mystical home of the light and dark elves , Helheim , the icy land of the dead , and Jötunheim , the mountainous land of the giants .
Other explorable realms include Niflheim , a realm of poisonous fog with a maze - like structure of rewards , and the fire realm Muspelheim , featuring the six Trials of Muspelheim ; completing each trial grants rewards and advances Kratos and Atreus closer to the top of a large volcano .
Access to the other three realms — Asgard , home of the Æsir gods , Vanaheim , home of the Vanir gods , and Svartalfheim , home of the dwarves — have been blocked by the ruler of Asgard and the Æsir gods , Odin .
At the center of the realms is the mythical tree Yggdrasil , which connects each realm together .
Although each realm is a different world , they simultaneously exist in the same space .
Travel to and from realms can be done by the use of the Bifröst from a root of Yggdrasil contained within a temple located at the center of the Lake of the Nine .
The temple was created by the now dead Týr , a peaceful God of War who had traveled to other lands and learned about their mythologies ; Odin had him killed as he believed Týr was secretly aiding the giants and would try to overthrow him .
CHARACTERS Section::::Characters .
The protagonists of the game are Kratos ( voiced by Christopher Judge ) and his young son Atreus ( Sunny Suljic ) .
Kratos is a warrior originally from Sparta who became the Greek God of War and is the son of Zeus .
After ending up in ancient Norway , he met his second and now deceased wife , Laufey ( addressed as Faye ) , and they bore their son , Atreus , who does not know about Kratos ' past or his divine nature , but can hear other beings ' thoughts .
The main antagonist is the Æsir god Baldur ( Jeremy Davies ) , the brother of Thor , whose sons Modi and Magni ( Nolan North and Troy Baker , respectively ) assist Baldur .
His parents are Odin and the Vanir god Freya ( Danielle Bisutti ) .
Freya tried leaving Odin , as she did not truly love him , and Odin had her banished to Midgard , after which she became known as the Witch of the Woods .
To protect her son from a prophecy that foretold his death , Freya cast a spell of immortality on Baldur , which also caused him to not feel pain or any feeling of pleasure , which he resented her for .
The only thing that she could not prevent from breaking the spell was mistletoe , which she kept secret .
Other characters include Mímir ( Alastair Duncan ) , who claims to be the smartest man alive , and the Huldra Brothers , Brok ( Robert Craighead ) and Sindri ( Adam J. Harrington ) , a pair of dwarves who appear at various points in the world and assist Kratos and Atreus with forging new gear .
Their weapons , including Thor 's hammer Mjölnir , were used by the Æsir gods and they also had forged Kratos ' Leviathan Axe , which originally belonged to Faye , who also gifted Kratos his Guardian Shield .
The spirit of the Greek goddess Athena ( Carole Ruggier ) makes a cameo appearance , and Zeus ( Corey Burton ) appears as an illusion to Kratos in Helheim .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Many years have passed since Kratos took his vengeance against the Olympian gods , and he now lives with his young son Atreus in ancient Norway in the realm of Midgard .
The game opens following the death of Kratos ' second wife and Atreus ' mother , Faye , whose last wish was for her ashes to be spread at the highest peak of the nine realms .
Before starting their journey , Kratos is confronted by a mysterious man with godlike powers .
After seemingly killing him , Kratos and Atreus begin their journey .
Reaching the Lake of the Nine , Kratos and Atreus encounter the friendly World Serpent , Jörmungandr , the last remaining giant .
After running into impenetrable black mist which can only be extinguished with the Light of Alfheim , they receive aid from the Witch of the Woods to use the Bifröst in order to travel to Alfheim and secure the Light .
Upon vanquishing the mist and reaching Midgard 's peak , they overhear a conversation between the mysterious man , revealed to be Baldur , his nephews Modi and Magni , and the imprisoned Mímir .
After they leave , Kratos and Atreus confront Mímir , who reveals that their goal is actually in Jötunheim , but travel there has been blocked to keep out Odin and Thor .
Mímir , however , knows another passage .
He instructs Kratos to cut off his head and have it revived by the Witch of the Woods , revealed to be Freya .
Kratos immediately distrusts her , but both Freya and Mímir warn him that he must tell Atreus about his true nature .
Kratos , Atreus , and Mímir 's head journey to collect needed components to open Jötunheim 's portal when they are attacked by Modi and Magni .
After Kratos kills Magni , Modi flees , but later returns and ambushes them .
Atreus collapses ill , which Mímir and Freya explain is a mental contradiction of a god believing himself to be mortal .
She tells Kratos that he must retrieve the heart of the Keeper of the Bridge of the Damned in Helheim , but his Leviathan Axe is useless there .
Kratos then returns home to unearth his old weapons , the Blades of Chaos , and is haunted by Athena 's spirit , who goads him about his past .
After retrieving the heart , he has a haunting vision of Zeus .
Atreus is cured and Kratos tells him that he is a god .
Atreus then becomes increasingly arrogant on their journey , and he murders a weakened Modi , despite Kratos ordering not to .
At Midgard 's peak , they are ambushed by Baldur , resulting in Jötunheim 's portal being destroyed and the group falling into Helheim .
Atreus makes amends with Kratos and they find out about Freya and Baldur 's familial relationship .
Returning to Midgard , Mímir realizes there is another way to reach Jötunheim , but it requires recovering his missing eye .
After obtaining it from Jörmungandr 's belly , who had inadvertently swallowed it when he ate a statue of Thor , they are attacked by Baldur again , but Freya intervenes in an attempt to protect her son .
During the fight , Baldur is pierced by Atreus ' mistletoe arrow , breaking Freya 's spell on him .
Baldur is defeated , and although Kratos gives him an opportunity to retreat , he instead attempts to strangle Freya , forcing Kratos to kill him .
A grieving Freya swears revenge on Kratos and taunts him about hiding his true nature from Atreus .
Kratos finally tells Atreus about his past and how he had killed his fellow Greek gods , including his father Zeus .
Atreus laments if all gods are good for is committing parricide .
Kratos tells Atreus that they should both learn from their experiences and not repeat the mistakes of their predecessors .
A silent Freya leaves with Baldur 's corpse and Mímir hopefully suggests that she will eventually move on from the tragedy and that Kratos did the right thing .
In Jötunheim , they find a temple with a mural depicting their adventures , showing that the giants had foreseen everything that would happen and vaguely foretold what was to come .
In addition , they discover that Faye was a giant who decided to stay behind in Midgard , making Atreus part giant , god , and mortal .
Their fight with Baldur was shown , revealing he was actually after Faye the whole time .
It is also revealed that Atreus was named Loki by his mother .
Wondering if Faye planned this in advance , Kratos and Atreus fulfill their promise and spread her ashes at the peak , overlooking a valley of giants ' corpses .
Afterwards , Kratos reveals to Atreus that his given name was also the name of a compassionate Spartan comrade .
When they return to Midgard , Mímir warns them that the three - year long Fimbulwinter has started , meaning Ragnarök is soon to follow , which was not supposed to occur for another hundred years .
In the game 's secret ending , Kratos and Atreus return home and slumber .
Atreus has a vision that at the end of Fimbulwinter , Thor will arrive at their home to confront them .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Development on the next God of War began in 2014 , which was confirmed by Santa Monica Studio 's creative director Cory Barlog at the first annual PlayStation Experience on December 6 , 2014 .
Barlog said that the game was in very early development and that it would not be a prequel , but possibly a reboot .
In April 2016 , Polygon reported that concept art of the next installment had been leaked .
The images showed Kratos in the world of Norse mythology ; a concept originally considered by series creator David Jaffe after Kratos eliminated the Greek gods .
The game 's official announcement came at the 2016 Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) with a gameplay demo that confirmed the concept art to be true .
The demo showed a fully bearded Kratos with a son , and Kratos was teaching the boy how to hunt .
The pair also battled a troll .
The end of the demo showed the title God of War and confirmed it was in development for the PlayStation 4 .
E3 also confirmed that Barlog had returned to the series as game director for the new installment .
Barlog has been a major contributor in the development of the God of War series since the original installment in 2005 , with his prior most notable role being game director of God of War II ( 2007 ) .
This new installment was his fifth God of War game .
In naming the game , Barlog stated that it was deliberately titled God of War with no numeral or subtitle because although it is a continuation of the series , " we are reimagining everything . "
Head of Santa Monica Studio Shannon Studstill and Barlog said that Sony Interactive Entertainment had to be convinced to do another God of War game as a lot of people at Sony wanted the series to " sleep and rest " due to the lackluster response of the previous game , Ascension .
In explaining why Barlog was brought back , Studstill said that he knew the series very well , " and bringing in someone that understands that history is the respect the franchise deserves .
" Barlog followed up with " You got ta know the rules to break the rules . " Series creator David Jaffe was also considered , but was unavailable .
In explaining the transition from Greek mythology to Norse mythology , Barlog said : " it 's kind of this BC – AD change over kind of thing .
We 're moving and starting from zero and kind of moving forward on that . "
Before settling on Norse mythology , Egyptian mythology was also considered .
Barlog said that half of the team was for it , but since " there 's a lot more about civilization – it 's less isolated , less barren " , he had to make the decision and decided on the Norse setting because they wanted the focus to stay on Kratos : " Having too much around distracts from that central theme of a stranger in a strange land . "
In explaining why Kratos was now in the Norse world , Barlog said that different cultures ' belief systems coexisted , but they were " separated by geography " , suggesting that Kratos traveled from Greece to Norway ( Scandinavia ) after the conclusion of God of War III ; in clarifying the conclusion of that game , Barlog said that Kratos did not destroy what was believed to be the entire world , but only the portion that was ruled over by the Greeks .
Barlog said that the new game predates the Vikings ; it is the time in which their gods walked the Earth .
It was also confirmed that this would not be Kratos ' last game .
Barlog said that future games could see the series tackling Egyptian or Mayan mythology , and that although this game focuses on Norse mythology , it alludes to the fact that there are other mythologies co - existing in the world .
Barlog also said that he liked the idea of having different directors for each game , seen throughout the first seven games , and although he may not direct another God of War , he would still be at Santa Monica to work on future games .
Most of the development team that worked on the original God of War worked on the new installment .
They claimed that they matched the new gameplay with the same level of accessibility as the previous installments .
It was confirmed that the game would not feature any morality system or branching story ; all players have the same story experience .
The developers also confirmed that some of the more controversial mini - games found in previous entries ( such as the sex mini - game ) would not return .
Some gameplay characteristics found in the previous installments were cut , such as jumping , swimming , and instant - death platforming challenges ; these were cut due to the camera being closer to Kratos .
Although the previous installment , Ascension , introduced multiplayer to the series , the team decided to drop the mode to focus on the single - player experience .
In changing the gameplay , Studstill said " I felt like , in order to reinvent , we really needed to turn a lot of things around . "
In regard to the camera change , Barlog said they were wanting a more intimate and player - controlled experience .
Explaining Kratos ' axe , lead gameplay designer Jason McDonald , who has worked on the series since the original game , said the axe was chosen because they wanted a more grounded direction for the game .
Initially , they were unsure how to make it unique , like how the double - chained blades were .
After they came up with the concept of throwing the axe and having it return to Kratos , " things started to fall into place . "
McDonald said that combat with the axe is a little slower than the blades , " but it 's just as fluid and just as brutal as it 's ever been . "
Barlog took inspiration from Dark Souls ( 2011 ) , which influenced the game 's combat system , particularly its gameplay loop and strategic decision - making , as well as the game 's approach to storytelling .
In addition , designers Anthony DiMento and Luis Sanchez revealed how God of Wars level design and exploration was influenced by Bloodborne ( 2015 ) , as they wanted to " just have the world breathe a little bit " and expand upon player discovery by including " micro - loops where you 're unlocking paths , unlocking shortcuts " that gave purpose .
DiMento said that a team dedicated to focus on the game 's exploration was formed .
One challenge was creating quests in a world that did not have non - playable characters outside of the core narrative .
DiMento said " I set out to create a quest giver that was light - weight , but also flexible enough to be used in multiple locations , while providing a varied suite of quest activities .
" This resulted in the " wayward spirits " ( ghosts with ties to the world ) found throughout the game .
Having the spirits tell their stories " made [ the world ] feel more alive " .
The developers ended up with a four - tiered system for side quests : the top tier quests were from the characters Brok and Sindri , the next level from wayward spirits , then treasure maps and artifacts , and the bottom tier were milestones , such as destroying all of Odin 's ravens .
Brok and Sindri 's quests were made into dungeons while the others were used for exploration .
The developers also had to find the reasons that would motivate Kratos to do these quests .
For Brok and Sindri , it was to obtain more powerful gear , but for the wayward spirits , it was because of Atreus ' naiveté and kind - hearted nature , as well as opportunities for Kratos to teach Atreus a lesson .
After God of War was revealed at E3 2016 , it drew comparisons to Naughty Dog 's The Last of Us ( 2013 ) , a game that also featured a father - child type story and gameplay .
Barlog felt that it was " fantastic " to be compared to that game and found it odd that some people considered the similarities to be a negative thing .
Although he did not directly state that they were influenced by The Last of Us in developing God of War , he did say " I think we 're all inspired by each other . "
The entire game was done in a single shot , as in no camera cuts , meaning there are no loading screens or fade - to - black between gameplay and cutscenes .
The enemy count was increased to up to 100 enemies on - screen ; God of War III and Ascension could do up to 50 .
Unlike the previous games , Santa Monica did not make a demo specifically for public release .
Barlog explained that doing so would have delayed the game by a couple of months .
He also confirmed that the game was built for the standard PlayStation 4 , but the game would " benefit from the power " of the PlayStation 4 Pro ; an updated version of the PlayStation 4 that can render games in 4 K and was released a few months after God of War was announced .
Players with a PS4 Pro have two options to either favor resolution or favor performance when playing the game .
Favoring resolution runs the game in 4 K with checkerboard rendering , while the performance option runs the game at 1080p .
Resolution mode targets a frame rate of 30 frames per second ( fps ) while performance mode targets 60fps .
In late December 2016 , Barlog confirmed that the game was playable from start to finish , and later said that the game 's story would take 25–35 hours to complete , which is significantly more than the previous four main installments , which each took an average of 10 hours to complete .
A new trailer was shown at E3 2017 , featuring new gameplay , cinematics , and characters .
In the trailer , Kratos was shown using a shield that he could use offensively and defensively .
At one point in the trailer , Kratos finds a Greek vase with himself on it , wielding his infamous double - chained blades .
During the trailer , an unnamed woman warns Kratos about the Norse gods , as they know what he did to the Greek gods , while a pair of wolves were also shown .
The trailer ends with Kratos and Atreus encountering the World Serpent .
Atreus was able to translate what it said , which was that it wanted to help the pair .
It was confirmed that the game would release in early 2018 .
Since then until the game 's launch , Santa Monica included a section on the God of War website titled " The Lost Pages " , detailing some of the lore of God of Wars Nordic world .
In January 2018 , the game 's release date was confirmed for April 20 , 2018 .
A trailer was also released that showed that the character Mímir from the mythology would have a role in the game .
God of War went gold on March 22 .
CHARACTERIZATION Section::::Characterization .
During early development , there was talk about having a different protagonist for the game , but it was decided to keep Kratos .
Referencing the Nintendo character Mario and the Mario games , Barlog said that just like Mario , " Kratos is intrinsically tied " to the God of War series .
In regards to the new changes , Barlog said that : Barlog explained that Kratos had to change his cycle of violence and learn how to control his rage .
He said that Kratos had made many bad decisions , which led to the destruction of Olympus , and wanted to know what would happen if Kratos made a good decision .
The birth of Barlog 's own son influenced the idea of Kratos ' character change .
The canceled live - action Star Wars television series was also an influence .
The bond between Kratos and his son is at the heart of the game and Barlog said " This game is about Kratos teaching his son how to be a god , and his son teaching Kratos how to be human again . "
Referencing the Marvel Comics character Hulk , Barlog said that in regards to Kratos , " We 've already told the story of The Hulk .
We want to tell the story of [ Bruce ] Banner now . "
One of their goals was to make Kratos " a more nuanced and interesting character .
" In changing the narrative focus , Studstill said " I think we inherently knew the franchise needed to evolve in that emotional beat and be something meatier for the older generation of gamers . "
Christopher Judge , best known as Teal'c from Stargate SG-1 , replaced T.C. Carson as the voice of Kratos ; Carson had voiced Kratos since the original God of War .
Commenting in response to the change , Carson said , " Sony went in a new direction . "
Barlog explained that the way the previous games were made , they were able to have someone else do the motion capture instead of the voice actor .
Although Carson had done the motion capture for Kratos in Ascension , Barlog said the actor change was made because of the type of camera work they wanted to do .
For the new camera work , they needed someone who was closer to Kratos ' size to do the motion capture along with a child .
Carson was unsuitable for this because he was much shorter than Kratos , who is over 6-feet tall : " Offsetting [ Carson 's height ] for the size of a child , it turned out it was going to be almost impossible to try and actually shoot them and go in and redo the animations . "
Judge was chosen because he was 6-foot-3 and had the body of a professional football player .
He was also chosen because of the chemistry with his then-10-year - old co - star , Sunny Suljic , who plays Kratos ' son Atreus ; Suljic 's opinion was also sought in making the decision , and out of all the auditions , he liked Judge the most .
The two bonded well , and Judge described his time with Suljic as time he had missed with his own children .
In stepping into the role of Kratos , Judge took it as an opportunity to add something new to the character .
He researched the character and Carson 's performance , but decided not to imitate it .
Since Santa Monica was going in a new direction , he decided to start fresh .
Judge was thrown off when he first read the script , stating it " was a real script " , and not just " a way to get into battles . "
He said " it was really this great story of this relationship and this crazy mythology . "
While Judge did all of Kratos ' motion capture for the cinematic scenes , stuntman Eric Jacobus did all of Kratos ' combat motion capture ; Jacobus was found by God of Wars animators on YouTube .
Instead of going directly to Santa Monica to audition , Jacobus recorded an audition tape and they immediately hired him .
During E3 2016 , GameSpot mistakenly reported that Kratos ' son 's name was Charlie , which Barlog laughingly denied .
In January 2017 , after a fan downloaded the God of War overture and saw the track 's details that said " An introduction to Kratos and Atreus " , Barlog confirmed on Twitter that Atreus was in fact the son 's name .
Barlog said that Atreus was unaware that Kratos was a demigod , and did not know about his past .
They did not reveal details of Atreus ' mother prior to release due to her being a critical part of the story .
Barlog stated that during gameplay , Atreus would be " like magic , an additional combat resource , and [ the player is ] training him and teaching him . "
The developers stated that Atreus would not be a burden during gameplay .
The team experimented with several different approaches for Atreus to ensure that he was an empowering presence .
Barlog said he did not want the game to be an escort - mission where the A.I. caused a problem for the player .
Their goal was for Atreus to enhance Kratos ' capabilities without Atreus becoming a liability .
This resulted in the developers designating a command button for Atreus as well as for him to act freely .
During combat , Atreus was also designed to call out enemy locations , as due to the camera being closer to Kratos , some enemies may be difficult for the player to see .
Jason McDonald said it took a lot of iterations with the enemies and Atreus to make it all work together .
Early in development , it was suggested for Atreus to be cut or to significantly minimize his role due to the many developmental challenges and financial expense .
Barlog stated that the game could have worked without Atreus , but it would have been completely different , likening it to that of the 2013 film All Is Lost .
Barlog said that with just Kratos , it would have been " one character who talks to himself occasionally , but generally , it will be very silent and everyone will talk in old Norse , so that you wo n't understand anything anybody 's saying . "
After hearing Barlog 's case , Sony gave him the freedom to incorporate Atreus .
Lead level designer Rob Davis also noted that with Atreus , it allowed for " significant gameplay and storytelling opportunities that might not otherwise [ been ] possible . "
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
God of War ( PlayStation Soundtrack ) was released on April 20 , 2018 by Sony Classical Records .
The soundtrack was composed by Bear McCreary , who is best known for his work on television shows such as Battlestar Galactica and The Walking Dead .
McCreary was called into Santa Monica Studio in November 2014 to meet with music producers Peter Scaturro and Keith Leary to discuss " a secret project " ; McCreary had previously collaborated with Scaturro and Leary on 2011 's .
Ideas of folk music , mythology , Nordic ethnic instruments , vocal writing , and classical thematic development were discussed , to which McCreary correctly guessed that the discussions were about a new God of War .
He met with Barlog early on , and they discussed Barlog 's narrative vision for the game .
After meeting with Barlog , McCreary felt that the franchise was in good hands because God of War II , which Barlog also directed , was his favorite installment .
During initial discussions , McCreary realized that he needed to compose completely new music for the game and not reuse any previous music from the series .
He said that although he loved those games , he " would not describe them as emotionally dynamic . "
Based on his memory of the previous games ' music , however , he was inspired by their sounds , such as " deep choirs , pounding drums , and shrieking brass " , and reinvented them for the Nordic setting .
In ensuring that the music represented the setting , McCreary spent months researching and listening to folk music of Viking antiquity , which resulted in him using " exotic instrumentation and languages from various Northern European folk traditions . "
He also wanted the score to be huge and varied , " full of peaks and valleys , tiny incantations and gigantic set pieces .
" The main Kratos theme in particular features low orchestral instruments , Icelandic choir , deep male vocals , powerful female vocals ( in particular Faroese singer Eivør Pálsdóttir ) , folk percussion , and Nordic stringed instruments , such as the nyckelharpa and hurdy gurdy .
The track " Witch of the Woods " uses a renaissance and baroque instrument called a viola da gamba , which is an ancestor of the modern cello .
The Stranger 's theme , found in the track " Deliverance " , uses a Hardanger fiddle .
The first theme composed for the game was " Memories of Mother " .
McCreary said the theme itself was not originally for Atreus ' mother Faye , but it was actually for Kratos himself .
His initial sketches were different variations of this melancholy tune .
After the game went into full production , McCreary and the development team realized it was " too sad and lyrical to represent Kratos . "
McCreary stepped away from this theme and focused on writing a new one , or what he called the Kratos Theme , which he felt was more representative of the character : " masculine , relentless , and badass " .
He spent several months working with Barlog , Scaturro , Leary , Sony music director Chuck Doud , and the rest of the development team in making this new theme .
McCreary described it as " arguably one of my most structurally satisfying and catchy melodies . "
After further scoring , McCreary realized that Faye would require a theme , and his original one was " exactly [ what ] I needed .
"
This melody was woven throughout several scenes and is featured as prominently in the game as Kratos ' theme .
The three - note Kratos theme is most obviously heard in the title track , " God of War " .
When it was decided that God of War would be revealed at E3 2016 , Sony wanted McCreary to perform his original score with a live orchestra at the press conference .
McCreary opened the show with the new main theme before the unveiling of God of War , and performed the gameplay demo 's music live during the presentation .
On January 13 , 2017 , a live recording from E3 2016 of God of Wars overture was released for free for a limited time .
Barlog released the overture as a thank you to fans for God of Wars E3
2016 trailer reaching fifteen million views on YouTube .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The game was released worldwide on April 20 , 2018 , for the PlayStation 4 .
In addition to the standard base game , there were three special editions : the Stone Mason Edition , the Collector 's Edition , and the Digital Deluxe Edition .
Only available in the United States and Canada , the Stone Mason Edition came with several physical items , including the base game in a SteelBook case , a statue of Kratos and Atreus that was created by Gentle Giant , carvings of the Huldra Brothers , a horse , and a troll , an exclusive lithograph , a cloth map , a stone mason 's ring , and a keychain of Mímir 's head that talks .
There was also various downloadable content ( DLC ) , including an exclusive shield skin , in addition to an armor set and another shield skin for Kratos , a PlayStation 4 dynamic theme , a digital artbook , and God of War # 0 by Dark Horse Comics .
The Collector 's Edition came with many of the same items , minus the ring , the keychain , the carvings of the horse and troll , and the exclusive shield skin .
The Digital Deluxe Edition comes with all of the digital content , minus the exclusive shield skin .
U.S. and Canadian customers also received a Kratos and Atreus pin for pre - ordering the Digital Deluxe Edition .
Pre - orders at select retailers received three skins for Kratos ' shield , while pre - orders from GameStop or EB Games also received the " Luck of Ages XP Talisman " , granting increased XP gain , increased Hacksilver gain , and increased ability to trigger perks .
In addition to the special editions of the game , a Limited Edition PlayStation 4 Pro bundle was available the same day as the game 's release .
The bundle included the standard base game , a PlayStation 4 Pro console decorated with the runes as on Kratos ' axe , and a similarly themed DualShock 4 controller with the God of War logo .
Game Director Cory Barlog confirmed that God of War would not have microtransactions post - launch , a feature that has become prominent with other recent games and negatively criticized .
An official novelization of the game , written by Cory Barlog 's father , James Barlog , was released on August 28 , 2018 by Titan Books .
An audiobook version is also available , narrated by Alastair Duncan , who voiced Mímir in the game .
Among the various digital content in the collector 's editions was God of War # 0 from Dark Horse Comics .
Issue # 1 was published in print on November 14 , 2018 .
Written by Chris Roberson with art by Tony Parker , the four - part miniseries takes place between the events of God of War III and the 2018 game .
Since launch , Santa Monica has supported the game via patch updates to address software bugs .
Additionally , the developers have added new features along with these free updates .
A Photo Mode was released as part of update patch 1.20 on May 9 , 2018 .
Photo Mode allows players to take customized in - game screenshots .
Players can adjust the field of view , depth of view , filters , borders , the visibility of characters , and the ability to change the facial expressions of Kratos and Atreus .
At E3 2018 , a New Game Plus mode was confirmed , and was released as part of update patch 1.30 on August 20 , 2018 .
In order for players to access the mode , they must have completed the game on any difficulty .
The mode itself can be played on any difficulty , but enemies are higher leveled with new maneuvers .
All obtained items carry over to New Game Plus , and there are new resources to further upgrade gear , which also have a new rarity level .
The option to skip cutscenes was also added .
GOD OF WAR : A CALL FROM THE WILDS Section::::God of War : A Call from the Wilds .
God of War : A Call from the Wilds is a text - based game playable through Facebook Messenger .
To help further promote God of War , Sony partnered with Facebook to develop the play - by - web game , which released on February 1 , 2018 .
Completing the game unlocks downloadable concept art .
The short story follows Atreus on his first adventure in the Norse wilds .
After archery training and learning runes with his mother , Atreus adventures into the wilderness after telepathically hearing the voice of a dying deer ; he finds it covered in blood and stays with it during its final moments .
A couple of draugrs appear and Atreus attempts to fight them , but is injured .
He is saved by his father , Kratos , who was out hunting .
The two then battle a revenant before returning home .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
God of War received " universal acclaim " according to review aggregator Metacritic , tying it with the original God of War for the highest score in the franchise .
It has the fourth - highest score of all - time for a PlayStation 4 game , and the highest score for an original , non - remastered PlayStation 4 exclusive .
It was the highest rated PlayStation 4 game of 2018 until the release of Red Dead Redemption 2 in October , which pushed God of War to second .
It is also tied with the Xbox One version of Celeste for the second - highest score of 2018 , regardless of platform .
God of War received particular praise for its art direction , graphics , combat system , music , story , use of Norse mythology , characters , and cinematic feeling .
Many also felt that it had successfully revitalized the series without losing the core identity of its predecessors .
The story was well praised .
Nick Plessas of Electronic Gaming Monthly ( EGM ) said that the story 's most memorable moments are the interactions between Kratos and Atreus .
He also noted that " there is often some comic relief to be found when Kratos ' curtness and Atreus ' charming naivety collide . "
Furthermore , he acknowledged that the presence of Atreus showed a side to Kratos not seen before , and that Kratos has evolved emotionally : " The rage and pain of his past is in constant conflict with his desire to spare his son from it , which comes across in even the most subtle actions and words , demonstrating the effort he is putting in .
"
Plessas also felt that Atreus ' character was similarly complex .
He cited that it is easy for child characters " to succumb to a number of annoying child archetypes , " but Atreus is more like a young man who is doing his best in an adult world .
Game Informers Joe Juba similarly praised the story , particularly the relationship between Kratos and Atreus : " The interactions of Kratos and Atreus range from adversarial to compassionate , and these exchanges have ample room to breathe and draw players in . "
Juba said that Kratos conveys more character than in any previous game .
Peter Brown of GameSpot felt that although Kratos and Atreus were enjoyable , it was Mímir who stole the show .
He also said that regardless of which character the player meets , the cast of God of War is " strong , convincing , and oddly enchanting . "
Writing for Game Revolution , Jason Faulkner praised Santa Monica in creating a sequel that new players would be able to understand without having played any of the previous games , while at the same time , providing story references to those past games that returning fans would appreciate .
Speaking of the relationship between Kratos and Atreus , Faulkner wrote that " Watching the two grow throughout their journey is incredibly rewarding , " equating it to that of Ellie and Joel from The Last of Us or Lee and Clementine from Telltale Games ' The Walking Dead .
In terms of the game 's combat system , Plessas stated that unlike previous games , which often relied on the player to use many combos in a sequential fashion , this game is " more about individual moves strung together in response to the assortment of enemies being fought . "
Although that difference may be small , he said that the independent attacks of the axe " feature benefits and drawbacks players will need to understand and master to be as effective as possible . "
Furthermore , although the axe is " conceptually simple " , it is " mechanically fascinating " , and it " succeeds as both a versatile means of dismembering foes and as a key element in puzzle solving . "
He felt that the axe and all of its features was " distinctly rewarding to use " and that it had more versatility than all of the weapons in other games .
Juba said the Leviathan Axe is " a well - balanced and entertaining tool of destruction . "
He liked how it " emphasizes a more calculated style of combat ; instead of zoomed - out , combo - driven encounters , Leviathan makes you a tactician . "
He also enjoyed how the combat system gradually unfolded through the course of the game ; although seemingly restrictive at first , players will be rapidly alternating between weapons and skills .
While some reviewers greatly enjoyed the ability to call the Leviathan Axe back to Kratos ' hand , Chris Carter of Destructoid , on the other hand , felt it got old after a while .
The implementation of Atreus was praised .
Plessas said that Atreus is " surprisingly useful " and that he " lands in the perfect spot on the spectrum between independence and reliance . "
Faulkner noted that " The interplay between Kratos ax , fists , and shield , and Atreus ' bow makes for an impressive fighting system . "
Despite its different approach to combat , compared to the previous games , GamesRadar+s Leon Hurley felt the game was " every bit as brutally unflinching as previous games . "
Writing for Polygon , Chris Plante praised the camerawork as a technical marvel , noting the seamless nature of the game shifting from cinematic back to the gameplay .
Juba said this decision " [ proved ] immensely rewarding during big moments by giving [ the player ] an intimate view . " Faulkner , however , claimed " it can be difficult to control the camera and keep a bead on the enemies you 're fighting . "
In his review for IGN , Jonathon Dornbush felt that the intimacy of the closer camera makes all of the emotions " more real and impactful . "
Speaking on the game 's visuals , Faulkner said that the game looks amazing , " and with 4 K and HDR this game goes a step beyond what even games like Horizon Zero Dawn showed us was possible on this platform . "
Brown noted that " God of War is a technical and artistic showcase .
It is without a doubt one of the best - looking console games ever released . "
Dan Ryckert of Giant Bomb claimed that games such as and Horizon Zero Dawn " made great cases for a PS4 Pro and a 4 K television , but God of Wars visuals are a bigger selling point than anything I 've seen on Sony 's platform to date . "
Despite the game 's grandeur , Plessas felt that the boss fights " do not hit quite the same frequency as they did in the past few games . "
However , the few boss fights that are in the game " do the series proud " .
In regards to the vast world of God of War , Faulkner said that " The great thing about the exploration in God of War is that you can participate in it as little or as much as you want . "
He said that an excellent design decision was that during main plot points , the game will keep the player on task , while in between , the player can explore , allowing God of War " to have the best of both worlds " .
Plessas noted that although the puzzles require thought , they are not " hair - pullingly " difficult as some were in previous games .
Juba also found that the puzzles were not too challenging , but did say they were fun .
Plessas felt that the RPG elements present in the game make this installment " unique " in comparison to previous entries .
He said the game allows players to " specialize Kratos to meet the specific task at hand , or develop a build that best suits a preferred playstyle . "
Although this does not make the game easier , he felt it does make it more manageable .
Juba noted that although this type of upgrading " may be less exciting " , compared to previous games where Kratos just learns new moves , it still , however , " provides a powerful incentive to explore .
" Ryckert was disappointed by this type of customization as he felt the presentation was " half - baked " and that some materials were confusing as there was little explanation given for what they were supposed to be used for .
He did , however , say it was " cool " to see new armor on Kratos .
In terms of flaws , Plessas said that " God of War is so good that its most egregious failing is not letting fans play more of it " , as New Game Plus was not an option at time of the review .
Juba stated that " God of Wars momentum rarely falters , and when it does , the inconvenience is brief . "
One example he gave was the map , saying that although players have freedom to explore , it can be difficult to track Kratos ' position .
He also felt that the fast - travel system was " weirdly cumbersome " and that it opens up too late in the game .
Although he enjoyed these features , Faulkner noted that some players may dislike the fact that the game has a lack of player agency , and that players have to explore the majority of game on foot or by boat since the fast - travel feature is unlocked late in the game .
Brown felt that if anything in the game was a letdown , it was the final fight against Baldur : " He 's great from a narrative standpoint , unraveling in a manner that changes your perspective , but it 's the fight itself that leaves you wanting .
There are plenty of big boss battles and tests of skill throughout the course of the game , yet this fight does n't reach the same heights , and feels like it was played a little safe . "
Hurley said his only criticism was that " You can occasionally find yourself unsure if you 're doing something wrong , or do n't have the right equipment yet . " SALES Section::::Sales .
During its release week in the UK , God of War became the fastest - selling entry in the franchise , selling 35 % more physical copies than God of War III .
The game remained at the top of the all format sales chart throughout April and May for six consecutive weeks , setting a record for a PlayStation 4 exclusive having the most consecutive weeks at number one .
It sold 46,091 copies within its first week on sale in Japan , which placed it at number two on the sales chart .
The game sold over 3.1 million copies within three days of its release , making it the fastest - selling PlayStation 4 exclusive at the time .
The game was the fastest - selling game of the month of its release and contributed to the PS4 being the best - selling console of that month .
In total , the game sold over five million copies in its first month , and 2.1 million in digital sales .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
The game was nominated for " Game of the Show " , " Best PlayStation 4 Game " , and " Best Action Game " at IGN 's Best of E3 2016 Awards . !
scope="col"Year !
scope="col"Award !
scope="col"Category !
scope="col"Result !
scope="col " class="unsortable"Ref .
NOTES
REFERENCES
WORKS
CITED
EXTERNAL LINKS
* God of War U.S. PlayStation website