THE SWORD OF SUMMER
The Sword of Summer is a young - adult fantasy novel based on Norse mythology written by American author Rick Riordan .
It was published on October 6 , 2015 by Disney Hyperion , and is the first novel in the Magnus Chase and the Gods of Asgard series .
The novel is narrated in the first - person view by Magnus Chase , 16-year - old demigod and homeless orphan .
After his death and arrival in Norse afterlife as an einherji , Magnus discovers that he is the son of the Norse deity , Frey , and must stop Fenris Wolf from escaping his prison and ending the world .
Since its release , the novel has been translated into 9 languages .
The Sword of Summer received positive reviews from critics , who praised its plot , humor , inclusion of diverse characters , and mature themes , but also noted it failing to rise above the author 's previous work .
The book has appeared on The New York Times children 's Best Seller list and the Amazon best - seller list .
It won the 2015 Goodreads Choice Award for Middle Grade and Children 's Fiction .
A sequel , The Hammer of Thor , was released on October 4 , 2016 .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
The novel opens on the sixteenth birthday of the protagonist Magnus Chase , who has been living on the streets of Boston since his mother Natalie 's death two years ago .
After learning that his uncle Randolph has unexpectedly sent his uncle Frederick and cousin Annabeth to search for him , Magnus breaks into Randolph 's house to look for answers .
Randolph catches Magnus and drives him to Longfellow Bridge , cryptically claiming that Magnus is the son of a Norse god , giving him magic powers and placing him in the sights of an unnamed magical enemy .
Randolph tells the boy that he must magically retrieve an ancient sword ( Sumarbrander , or the " Sword of Summer " ) hidden in Boston Harbor to protect himself .
A fire giant known as Surt appears demanding the sword , and begins to destroy the bridge .
Magnus attacks Surt to allow other pedestrians time to escape .
As he realizes that he is about to die , he manages to wound the demon and hurl the two of them off the bridge .
He dies on impact with the water .
Magnus awakens in a place called Hotel Valhalla as an einherjar , where he is told he will spend eternity training for the day of Ragnarök .
He is introduced to a Valkyrie named Sam who brought him to Valhalla , and to his new einherjar hallmates .
During Magnus ' welcome feast , the three Norns pronounce Magnus a son of Frey and deliver a confusing prophecy .
The hotel 's ruling council banishes Sam the Valkyrie for apparently " wrongly [ choosing ] " Magnus .
That night , Magnus 's " human " friends Hearth and Blitz arrive and reveal they are actually an elf and dwarf , respectively .
They convince him to leave the hotel .
In Midgard , the trio joins up with Sam .
The group then meets with the god Mimir , who tasks them with finding the Sword before Surt and bringing it to the island of Fenris Wolf .
They retrieve the sword from the sea goddess Ran and journey to Nidavellir to secure a new binding for the Wolf .
During his quest , Magnus experiences dream - visions of Loki , and once even of the goddess Hel offering to reunite him with his late mother — a proposal he struggles to refuse .
After a detour to Jotunheim , where they help the god Thor and Magnus discovers new magical powers , they finally arrive at Fenris ' island .
Despite being attacked by a group of Valkyries , some of Magnus ' hallmates , and Surt , they successfully rebind the Wolf .
Magnus has a brief vision of his father Frey before returning to Hotel Valhalla to stand trial for his disobedience .
Before he can be punished , however , Magnus 's hallmate X stands and reveals himself to be the god Odin , in disguise .
Odin rewards each of the heroes in turn , finally offering Magnus a chance to return to life or choose a different afterlife .
Magnus declines , but returns to Boston to speak with his cousin Annabeth .
The two hold a funeral for Natalie Chase and exchange stories of each other 's lives as demigods .
Meanwhile , in the epilogue , Loki punishes Randolph for not being able to stop Magnus from rebinding Fenris .
Loki implies that Randolph 's family will be in danger if the man does not cooperate .
CHARACTERS
* Magnus Chase – A 16-year - old son of Frey who dies in the first few chapters but becomes an einherjar .
He is Annabeth Chase 's cousin , but last saw her when he was very young .
He has healing and regeneration powers , resistance to extreme temperatures , and other magical abilities .
As a human , he was asthmatic and weak , but gains extreme strength and endurance after his death .
* Samirah " Sam " al - Abbas – The Valkyrie who brought Magnus to Hotel Valhalla .
A daughter of Loki , she emigrated from Iraq with her family and is descended from a medieval Arab traveler and historian who wrote an important account about living among the Vikings .
She is a practicing Muslim , a shapeshifter and carries an axe and a green hijab , which doubles as a camouflage cloak .
She is engaged to her second cousin , Amir Fadlan , who works in a falafel shop .
* Hearthstone " Hearth " – A friend of Magnus .
He is an alf ( elf ) .
He is deaf - mute , but speaks Alf Sign Language and can read lips .
He had an abusive childhood , with parents who disliked him because of his disabilities .
In exchange for working for Mimir , he received the ability to work rune magic .
* Blitzen " Blitz " – Another friend of Magnus , a svartalf ( dwarf ) .
He is the son of Freya .
He and Hearth watched over Magnus while he was living in the streets .
Blitz 's father was killed by Fenris when he was a child , after an attempt to replace the Fenris Wolf 's bindings .
Blitz is unskilled at crafting ( unusual for dwarves ) but is a master fashion advisor .
He , like Hearth , once worked for Mimir .
* X / Odin – A half - troll that is one of Magnus ' hallmates , X is later revealed to be Odin in disguise , in order to inspect the einherjar without them knowing .
Sam brought X to Valhalla when he died dismantling a dog - fighting ring .
He is called X because his real name is difficult to pronounce .
* Jack ( Sumarbrander ) – The title character of the book ( Sumarbrander is Norse for " sword of summer " ) , a magic sword that can talk and once belonged to Frey until he gave it up and lost its allegiance .
Magnus retrieved it from Boston Harbor , won its allegiance , and nicknamed it Jack .
He can take the form of a pendant and move on his own .
PROPHECY
Section::::Prophecy .
The prophecy that was given to Magnus by the Norns reads :
Wrongly chosen , wrongly slain ,
A hero
Valhalla can not contain .
Nine days hence the sun must go east , Ere Sword of Summer unbinds the beast .
The first line of the prophecy was initially taken as confirmation that Magnus was unfit for duty as an einherjar ; later , Odin interprets it to mean that Loki chose the wrong hero to manipulate .
The second line refers to how Magnus manages to leave Valhalla despite claims that the hotel is impossible to escape .
The final two lines describe how Sumarbrander was fated to free Fenris ( as it did before rebinding him ) , and how the one day of the year where Fenris ' island can be reached by a mortal was exactly nine days from the date the prophecy was given .
COMPOSITION AND MARKETING Section::::Composition and marketing .
During Riordan 's book tour for The House of Hades , he announced that he was writing a Norse mythology series that would take place in Boston .
He also stated that his plans for the setting were unrelated to his recent move to the city , although living in Boston made researching for the series less difficult .
On September 23 , 2014 , Riordan broadcast a webcast from the Empire State Building and announced the name of the series : Magnus Chase and the Gods of Asgard .
The title of the first book , The Sword of Summer , was revealed in the final page of The Blood of Olympus .
On June 18 , 2015 , the cover and the second chapter were released on USA Today .
The first five chapters were revealed on September 28 , 2015 .
To prepare readers for the new book , Riordan posted images of Norse vocabulary words on his Twitter account starting August 28 , 2015 , along with the hashtag # norsecrashcourse .
Words such as Valhalla , Ragnarok , and Yggdrasil were all included and defined .
In the months preceding The Sword of Summer 's publication , Disney - Hyperion and Rick Riordan advertised even more heavily for the new book .
Riordan embarked on a tour across the U.S. , speaking to hundreds of fans on each stop of his tour .
An online myth - writing competition was sponsored by Scholastic just before the novel 's publication , with the grand prize of a " virtual visit " from Rick Riordan .
Finally , Riordan signed 10,000 copies of The Sword of Summer , to be distributed on Black Friday at Barnes & Noble stores nationwide , as yet another massive advertising campaign .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The Sword of Summer was first published as a hardcover in the United States on October 6 , 2015 , with cover illustration by John Rocco and interior rune illustrations by Michelle Gengaro - Kokmen .
It had a first printing of 2.5 million hardcover copies in the United States .
Ebook editions were published worldwide on the same date , available through the print edition publishers or ebook distributors such as Kindle .
An audiobook was released October 6 by Listening Library in the U.S.
The Sword of Summer debuted as 1 on the New York Times Children 's Middle Grade Hardcover Best Sellers list and has remained there for 36 weeks as of June 30 , 2016 .
It was also # 3 on Amazon 's best - selling Children 's Books list for 2015 .
Many publishers in other countries - including Puffin Books in the UK - released hardcover editions on October 6 , or shortly thereafter .
An audiobook edition was released by Penguin Random House Audio in the UK .
An audiobook in German was released in 2016 .
To date , editions have been published in English , Spanish , Italian , Portuguese , French , Polish , Turkish , Dutch , Bulgarian , and Finnish .
The majority of foreign - language editions have been published with the same U.S. cover art , but a few boast unique illustrations not done by illustrator John Rocco .
The book received a Lexile score of 630L , making it age- and difficulty - appropriate for the average 9 - 13 year - old .
On Scholastic , the book is recommended to teachers as appropriate material for grades 6 - 8 and 9 - 12 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The Sword of Summer has been very well received since its publication .
Maggie Reagan of Booklist admonished readers and booksellers to " buy extra copies , and prepare for the siege . ...
Riordan has the magic touch ...
" School Library Journal explained the book 's success with its comment : "
With an epic plot , engaging ( and diverse ) characters , and tons of wise - cracking humor , Riordan 's latest is a page turner . ...
fans of his previous works will [ also ] be happy to see clever nods and references to the other in - universe books . "
While reviewer Jody Mitori said Riordan 's pop culture " references may date the book in years to come " , she went on to assert that " for now , they make the trek entertaining " .
Among overall children 's book sales in 2015 , The Sword of Summer did very well , but was not a " big front - runner " among other bestselling books .
The Sword of Summer has been praised especially as an excellent example of a Riordan novel .
Kirkus Reviews , for example , wrote , " First there were the Greek gods , then the Egyptian gods , then the Roman gods — now Riordan takes on the Norse gods . ...
A fast - paced , eventful , and largely successful pivot . " More specific aspects of the novel have also been noted by critics .
Author Cassandra Clare 's review , praised " Riordan 's effervescent world - building " , in addition to the novel 's humor and breakneck plot .
Author Michael Grant lauded the novel as " a propulsive , kinetic , witty rebooting of Norse mythology with all the charm of the Percy Jackson novels . "
KidsReads 's review praised the characters and their development , saying " Magnus Chase feels fresh and exciting " even with its oft - used mythological themes .
Reviewers such as Publishers Weekly have praised the book , saying , " Riordan plays much of the material for laughs ... and brings the Norse gods into the 21st century ...
The sensibility is right in line with the Percy Jackson novels , and the audience will be just as large . "
A few reviews — most notably Adam Gopnik 's in The New York Times — have expressed disappointment at the novel 's failing to rise above Riordan 's previous work , however .
Gopnik 's review acknowledged the difficulties modern - myth authors like Riordan face in writing for a young audience ; such as the " required " action scenes , fantastic powers , and drama ; but went on to question Riordan 's inadequate portrayal of " the special quiddity that separates Norse mythology from other kinds ...
its fatalism " .
A similar review from the St. Louis Post - Dispatch asserted that " at nearly 500 pages , Sword of Summer is too long " and loses some of its charm from the overuse of " quests - within - a - quest " .
While Gopnik and others accept The Sword of Summer as of passable quality and certain to appeal to many readers , Gopnik summarizes their views in his review 's concluding lines : "
The marvels of myth Riordan recreates here as before ; the mystery of myth remains unactualized in his work or , sadder and more likely , unasked for by his time . "
On a more positive note , some critics appreciated Riordan 's new turn towards multiculturalism .
Other reviewers have shown interest in Riordan 's choice to kill his main character and other signs of his newest story being more mature than the famous Percy Jackson & the Olympians .
Kirkus praised Riordan 's interesting choice to make the main female protagonist , Samirah al - Abbas , happily betrothed — and thus " blessedly free of romantic tension " with Magnus .
The Sword of Summer won the Goodreads Choice Award for the Middle Grade and Children 's Fiction of 2015 .
SEQUEL
Section::::Sequel .
A sequel , The Hammer of Thor was released on October 4 , 2016 .
SEE ALSO REFERENCES