MY LITTLE PONY : THE MOVIE ( 2017 FILM )
My Little Pony : The Movie is a 2017 animated musical fantasy film based on the television series , which was developed as part of the 2010 re - launch of the My Little Pony franchise by Hasbro .
The film was directed by Jayson Thiessen and based on a story and screenplay co - written by Meghan McCarthy , both Friendship Is Magic veterans .
The plot follows the alicorn , her five pony friends – collectively known as the " Mane 6 " – and her dragon assistant embarking on a quest to save their home of Equestria from an evil conqueror , gaining new friends in the process .
In addition to the show 's regular voice cast reprising their roles , the film features the voices of Emily Blunt , Kristin Chenoweth , Liev Schreiber , Michael Peña , Sia , Taye Diggs , Uzo Aduba , and Zoe Saldana as new characters .
The film was produced by Allspark Pictures and DHX Media , using traditional animation created with Toon Boom Harmony .
It premiered in New York City on September 24 , 2017 , and was released on October 6 , 2017 in North America through Lionsgate .
The film received mixed reviews from critics and grossed over $ 60million worldwide on a $ 6.5 million budget .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The ponies of Equestria prepare for their first Friendship Festival , overseen by Princess in Canterlot .
The festivities are interrupted by an invasion of monsters commanded by the broken - horned unicorn Tempest Shadow , who uses magical obsidian orbs to petrify Twilight 's fellow princesses ; gives incomplete instructions to seek help from " the queen of the hippo " before they are both petrified .
Twilight flees the city alongside her five pony friends – , , , , and – and her dragon assistant , .
Tempest is contacted by her superior , the Storm King , who reminds her to gather all of Equestria 's princesses for him to harness their magic through his mystical staff , promising to restore her horn in exchange .
Twilight 's group travel to the desert city of Klugetown in search of the aforementioned " hippos " .
A feline con artist named Capper offers to escort the group , secretly intending to sell them to settle a debt ; however , he develops a genuine friendship with them .
Twilight discovers an atlas that reveals the " hippos " to be hippogriffs , exposing Capper 's treachery .
After the group evade a pursuing Tempest aboard a delivery airship , Tempest brings Capper to guide her to them , but he deliberately misdirects her to atone for deceiving the group .
During a lunch break , the airship 's birdlike Captain Celaeno and her crew reluctantly allow the group passage , revealing themselves to be former pirates that have been forced into the Storm King 's service .
Rainbow Dash persuades the pirates to defy orders and take the group to the hippogriffs ' kingdom on Mount Aris .
In celebration , she performs a Sonic Rainboom that inadvertently gives their location away to Tempest , forcing the group to escape in a makeshift hot air balloon before Tempest destroys the ship with the pirates and Capper on board .
The group reach Mount Aris to find it deserted ; while exploring the ruins , they become trapped in an underwater cavern , where they are saved from drowning by the seapony Princess Skystar and led to her undersea home of Seaquestria .
Skystar identifies her kind as the hippogriffs , transformed by a magic pearl used by her mother , Queen Novo , to hide from the Storm King ; Novo demonstrates by turning the ponies into seaponies and Spike into a pufferfish .
When Novo denies them the pearl to use against the Storm King , Twilight desperately attempts to steal it while letting her friends unknowingly distract the seaponies .
Her plan backfires when she unwittingly triggers an alarm , prompting the outraged queen to banish the entire group to the surface .
Abandoned by her friends over her actions , Twilight is kidnapped by Tempest and brought to the Storm King in Canterlot to have her magic absorbed ; en route , Tempest gains Twilight 's sympathy when she divulges how she lost her horn in a monster attack as a filly , which caused her own friends to shun her for her dangerously unstable magic .
Meanwhile , after Spike alerts Twilight 's friends to her capture , Capper , the pirates , and the hippogriff Skystar return to help them infiltrate Canterlot and mount a rescue .
The Storm King retaliates by conjuring a tornado in the city with his newly empowered staff , betraying Tempest as well .
Twilight saves Tempest from the tornado and reunites with her friends , who work together with her to take the staff .
The Storm King hurls an obsidian orb at the group to reclaim the staff , but Tempest jumps in his way , petrifying them both .
The Storm King 's body falls and shatters , while the group use the staff 's magic to revive Tempest , who returns the stolen magic to restore the princesses and the damaged city .
The Friendship Festival resumes , and the ponies celebrate with all of the allies
Twilight 's group have made on their adventure .
Tempest is disheartened by her still broken horn until she is convinced by Twilight to join the party by producing a fireworks display with her magic , happily accepting the group 's friendship .
CAST
* Tara Strong as , an intelligent alicorn who is Equestria 's Princess of Friendship , responsible for spreading friendship and harmony across the kingdom .
She is the leader of the " Mane 6 " ponies .
Rebecca Shoichet performs Twilight Sparkle 's singing voice .
* Ashleigh Ball as and , two of the " Mane 6 " ; Rainbow Dash is a loyal pegasus with an adventurous spirit , and Applejack is an honest apple farmer pony .
* Andrea Libman as and , two of the " Mane 6 " ; Pinkie Pie is a party - obsessed pony filled with joy and laughter , and Fluttershy is a kind , timid pegasus who cares for animals .
Shannon Chan - Kent performs Pinkie Pie 's singing voice .
* Tabitha St. Germain as , a generous fashion designer unicorn and one of the " Mane 6 " .
Kazumi Evans performs Rarity 's singing voice .
* Cathy Weseluck as , a baby dragon who is Twilight Sparkle 's faithful assistant .
* Emily Blunt as Tempest Shadow , an embittered unicorn once known as Fizzlepop Berrytwist who serves as the Storm King 's second - in - command in order to repair her broken horn .
On the development of the character , screenwriter Meghan McCarthy said , " We just arrived at this idea of a character who had come from Equestria , and had not had the positive experience that Twilight [ Sparkle ] and her friends had .
It felt like a good counterpart to our heroes was to have a villain who did n't just not get friendship , but had a reason that she did n't understand it . "
McCarthy also called Blunt 's performance " a big influence " on how the character was animated in the film .
* Michael Peña as Grubber , a wisecracking hedgehog creature and Tempest Shadow 's cohort .
McCarthy said that Grubber " needed to be goofy " to counterpoint the " very straight - laced , hardcore " Tempest .
Peña ad - libbed much of the character 's dialogue , with McCarthy saying , " You get Michael Peña in a recording booth , and you just are like , ' Please just go and say funny things . '
He will be there for hours , just giving you all kinds of really great material that was not something that we had originally scripted ! "
* Liev Schreiber as the Storm King , the despotic , satyr - like leader of the storm creatures who conquers lands in search of powerful magic to control the weather .
On his acceptance of the role , Schreiber said that he wanted something child - friendly for his kids to watch , noting his repertoire of violent , adult - oriented films .
Comparing his character to Basil Rathbone , Schreiber said the Storm King " is prone to temper tantrums , and he 's a little crazy .
He has a wide range of behaviors . "
He considers the character to be " one of the more intense roles [ he 's ] played " .
* Taye Diggs as Capper , a humanoid alley cat who is a cunning yet good - hearted con artist .
Diggs , who was excited to appear in an animated film , says , " I 'm very movement - oriented , so just looking at the way Capper is positioned , the expressions on his face , all enhances my performance .
It 's really cool . "
* Zoe Saldana as Captain Celaeno , a humanoid parrot and jaded pirate captain who is relegated to the Storm King 's delivery service .
Saldana says Celaeno " cares for her crew " , adding , " She 's a responsible , thoughtful , and empathetic leader .
That 's a terrific , very poignant message to give to children about leadership – that it 's okay for you to want to be a leader as long as you know that the responsibilities that come along with it . "
* Kristin Chenoweth as Princess Skystar , an excitable seapony and magically transformed hippogriff princess .
Chenoweth said of her character , " Let 's just say she 's been locked up for a while and is longing for friends . "
She joked that she dabbled in method acting for the role , making sure her hair was " on point for every recording session " .
* Uzo Aduba as Queen Novo , the benevolent ruler of the hippogriffs - turned - seaponies , and Princess Skystar 's mother .
The character is described by Chenoweth as " loving but also a little too strict and stern " .
Detailing her role , Aduba says , " She [ wants ] to protect her group to the best of her ability , and [ wants ] to create a life of peace and stability .
She does n't take any nonsense , and will do everything in her power to protect her family . "
* Sia as Songbird Serenade , a pegasus and famous pop star in Equestria .
The character 's design is modeled after Sia 's likeness .
Section::::Cast .
Nicole Oliver , St. Germain , and Britt McKillip reprise their respective roles from Friendship Is Magic as alicorns , , and .
St. Germain also voices , Applejack 's grandmother , and , a cross - eyed gray pegasus .
Michelle Creber and Peter New voice
and , Applejack 's younger sister and older brother , respectively .
Michael Dobson voices , a muscular pegasus .
Samuel Vincent voices Party Favor , a balloonist unicorn .
Adam Bengis voices
Code Red , one of the Canterlot ponies .
Brian Dobson voices Verko , a mole - rat crime boss in Klugetown .
Max Martini , Mark Oliver , and Nicole Oliver respectively perform as three of Captain Celaeno 's parrot - like crew : Boyle , first mate Mullet , and Lix Spittle .
Michael Dobson , Andrew McNee , Tegan Moss , Sabrina Pitre , Rhona Rees , and Vincent all feature as assorted citizens of Canterlot .
Richard Ian Cox , Michael Dobson , McNee , New , and Nicole Oliver also perform as denizens of Klugetown .
Additional voices are provided by Alistair Abell , Caitlyn Bairstow , Julia Benson , Christine Chatelain , Brian Dobson , Paul Dobson , Rondel Reynoldson , Jason Simpson , Sarah Troyer , and Siobhan Williams .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
At San Diego Comic - Con International in 2012 , Friendship Is Magic head writer Meghan McCarthy commented on the possibility of a feature film based on the series , saying that it was not in her control whether or not the film would be made .
The film was announced on October 20 , 2014 , with Joe Ballarini attached as screenwriter and McCarthy as co - executive producer .
Hasbro Studios president Stephan Davis said of the film that " I think it gives us an opportunity to tell a bigger story , that maybe we [ ca n't ] tell on television " and that " [ it 's ] also an opportunity to broaden the franchise " .
The film is one of the first being produced through Hasbro Studios ' self - financing film label Allspark Pictures , which also produced the live - action adaptation of Jem and the Holograms .
During PonyCon AU on February 22 , 2015 , McCarthy said that the movie would be unrelated to the spin - off franchise , and that the crew was " going all out on it , to make sure it does n't just feel like an extended episode " .
Series director Jayson Thiessen and McCarthy were both confirmed as the film 's director and screenwriter , respectively ; Michael Vogel was also signed on as co - executive producer alongside McCarthy , with Hasbro executives Brian Goldner and Stephen Davis as producers .
Rita Hsiao and Vogel were later announced as co - writers alongside McCarthy .
On April 30 , 2016 , concept artwork and other information was officially revealed at PonyRadioCon in Moscow ; the panel included additional plot details such as the main characters ' transformation into " sea ponies " for a portion of the film .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
The initial Lionsgate announcement listed the principal voice cast of Friendship Is Magic –
Tara Strong , Ashleigh Ball , Andrea Libman , Tabitha St. Germain , and Cathy Weseluck –
reprising their roles alongside actress Kristin Chenoweth as a new character .
On February 12 , 2016 , it was announced that Emily Blunt joined the voice cast .
By April 27 , 2016 , actors Michael Peña and Uzo Aduba were in negotiations to join the cast .
On May 16 , Liev Schreiber and Taye Diggs were confirmed additions to the cast .
On June 20 , Ashleigh Ball stated through Twitter that she had begun recording for the film 's songs .
At San Diego Comic - Con in July 2016 , singer Sia was announced to be portraying a new " pop star pony " character called Songbird Serenade .
On January 11 , 2017 , it was reported by Variety that Zoe Saldana had joined the cast .
Friendship Is Magic voice actress Nicole Oliver confirmed via Twitter on January 23 that she would also be a part of the film 's cast , reprising her role as Princess Celestia .
ANIMATION Section::::Animation .
On April 2 , 2016 , Michel Gagné joined the film as an effects animator , taking an eight - month hiatus from made by Sony Pictures Animation .
In early October 2016 , Gagné reported that Nik Gipe was hired onto the film 's staff as his assistant .
He also mentioned that the film was being animated using Toon Boom Harmony instead of the usual animation software Adobe Flash that is used in .
According to art director Rebecca Dart , they wanted to keep to the look and feel of the television show , and the use of Toon Boom Harmony enabled them to add " simple yet impactful changes " to the designs for the big screen , such as depth and shadows for their eyes and ears , and the impression of heart - shaped indentations on the bottom of their hooves .
The production of the film ended by July 29 , 2017 .
The production crew used simple 3D modeling in Autodesk Maya as to determine camera locations , lens , and angles , rough lighting , character and prop placement , and which way the characters would be looking and expressing .
The pre - visualization crew were able to use the 3D backdrops that became more detailed throughout the film 's development to integrate the simple 3D character models , and then were able to test the Toon Boom animations on top of these scenes using the placement established by Maya , helping to speed up the production .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The film 's official soundtrack was released on September 22 , 2017 by RCA Records .
The film 's songs and score were composed by Friendship Is Magic songwriter Daniel Ingram , who first announced at GalaCon 2015 that he would be collaborating with a live studio orchestra for the film .
On his songwriting for the film , Ingram said , " I had to challenge myself to push beyond what had been done in the TV show ; to write bigger , more epic .
" It was stated through the PonyRadioCon panel that the film would have a total of eight original songs .
At Hasbro 's Toy Fair investor presentation on February 17 , 2017 , it was announced that there would be seven songs .
Around 5,800 pages of sheet music were created for all orchestral parts of the score .
Recording for the score began on June 5 , 2017 , and finished on June 11 .
An album containing the background music scores from the film is scheduled for a November 16 , 2018 release .
Sia contributed an original song to the film , " Rainbow " , which was released as a single on September 15 , 2017 .
A music video for the song later released by Entertainment Weekly on September 19 .
The video was directed by Daniel Askill and features a dance performance by Maddie Ziegler , a previous collaborator with Sia , intercut to scenes from the film .
Danish band Lukas Graham also contributed an original song for the film titled " Off to See the World " , which was used in the film 's first trailer and played over the closing credits .
Other artists included in the album are DNCE and CL .
The score for the film was released on November 16 , 2018 , more than a year after the film was released .
RELEASE Section::::Release .
On August 7 , 2015 , Lionsgate announced that they would distribute and market the film worldwide except in China .
The film was showcased at the 2016 Cannes Film Festival on May 10 along with eight other Lionsgate features to help sell the film to international distributors .
My Little Pony : The Movie was originally scheduled for release in the United States on November 3 , 2017 , but it was subsequently moved up to October 6 , 2017 .
Theatrically , the film was accompanied by a 5-minute animated short from Hasbro Studios ' web series .
A private premiere screening was held in New York City on September 24 , 2017 , twelve days prior to the nationwide release date .
MARKETING Section::::Marketing .
Numerous toys based on characters , sets , and props from the film were made by Hasbro , and a vast majority of the products was released on August 1 , 2017 .
The 2016 PonyRadioCon panel included a brief preview for some of the planned merchandise being developed for the film , including T - shirts and graphics .
On July 27 , 2016 , the My Little Pony Collectible Card Game hinted on Twitter about a new set of cards based on the film .
Hasbro 's toyline for the film was shown and promoted at Toy Fair 2017 and various other toy conventions .
Several books and comics related to the film have been announced : My Little Pony : Annual 2018 , which contains " exclusive content from the My Little Pony movie " was released on August 10 , 2017 ; and a " prequel " story released on August 1 .
On January 23 , 2017 , Hachette Book Group listed five different books for the film , all released on August 29 , 2017 .
Books based on the film have been showcased at BookCon 2017 on June 4 , with guest appearances by Andrea Libman and Ashleigh Ball .
IDW Publishing released a four - issue comic book miniseries titled , with the first issue released on June 28 , 2017 .
Viz Media released an art book for the film on August 29 , 2017 .
A comic adaptation based on the film by IDW was released on September 27 , 2017 .
A teaser trailer for the film was released online on April 6 , 2017 , and in theaters alongside the following day .
The first full trailer debuted online on June 28 , 2017 , and was released with Despicable Me 3 two days later .
Another trailer was released by USA Today online on September 12 , 2017 .
The same day , the official My Little Pony Facebook page hosted a live Q&A stream with two of the movie 's characters , Pinkie Pie ( voiced by Andrea Libman ) and Twilight Sparkle ( voiced by Tara Strong ) .
Another trailer was played during the season 12 finale of America 's Got Talent on September 20 , 2017 .
On September 27 , 2017 , the official My Little Pony Facebook page hosted a live Q&A stream with art director Rebecca Dart , who drew a custom artwork of Rainbow Dash ( voiced by Ashleigh Ball ) .
On September 30 , 2017 , a special titled The Making of My Little Pony : The Movie aired on Discovery Family , a joint venture between Discovery Communications ( now Discovery , Inc. ) and Hasbro ; it was watched by 18,000 viewers .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
My Little Pony : The Movie was released on December 19 , 2017 for digital downloads , and was later released on January 9 , 2018 for DVD , Blu - ray , and On Demand .
Its special features includes a deleted scene , a music video for the song "
I 'm the Friend You Need " , three featurettes starring the Mane Six , an exclusive Equestria Girls animated short , and the Hanazuki : Full of Treasures short bundled with the film 's theatrical release .
However , the home media release lacks a Dolby Atmos soundtrack and instead has a standard DTS - HD Master Audio 5.1 mix .
A home media bundling both this film and the was released on October 16 , 2018 , commemorating the 35th anniversary of the My Little Pony toy line .
The releases contain the same bonus features as its DVD / Blu - ray counterparts .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
My Little Pony : The Movie has grossed $ 21.8million in the United States and Canada , and $ 38.5million in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 60.3million on a production budget of $ 6.5 million .
In the United States and Canada , the film was expected to gross between $ 10million and $ 17million from 2,528 theaters in its opening weekend .
It made $ 3million on its first day , including $ 290,000 from Thursday night previews .
It ended up opening to $ 8.9 million finishing 4th at the box office behind Blade Runner 2049 , The Mountain Between Us , and It .
Amid Amidi of Cartoon Brew stated that , despite the opening being considered a disappointment , any reasonable return from the film would be seen as positive by Hasbro because it is tied to the toy line .
The film dropped 54 % in its second weekend , making $ 4.1million and falling to 9th .
Its biggest markets outside North America are China with $ 7.3million , the UK with $ 4.9million , Russia with $ 2.3million , and Germany with $ 2.3million .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 48 % based on 60 reviews , with an average rating of 5.2/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Charming and sweet ,
My Little Pony : The Movie will please its dedicated fanbase , even if it 's unlikely to encourage non - devotees to gallop along for the ride .
"
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 39 out of 100 , based on 13 critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A− " on an A+ to F scale .
Katie Walsh of the Los Angeles Times wrote , " Truthfully , this film feels like four episodes of a cartoon strung together , and there are times , especially during some of the latter musical numbers , where it truly drags . "
She also remarked on the film 's animation , saying it " embraces the flat , colorful , Saturday - morning cartoon look and feel " .
Christy Lenore of RogerEbert.com gave the film 1.5 stars out of 4 , criticizing the narrative as being " all over the place " and having " a multitude of underdeveloped , crammed - in characters " , while commending the film for retaining the Friendship Is Magic television series cast and staff .
Josh Terry of Deseret News criticized the film , saying parents should " put their money into some new My Little Pony toys " rather than go see the movie .
Gwen Ihnat of The A.V. Club gave the film a " C " grade , favoring the improved animation over the television series , but adding " you have to wonder to what use it 's being put " .
Elizabeth Weitzman of TheWrap wrote positively of the film , saying , " Like its television predecessor , is all dressed up in bubbles and cupcakes and rainbows .
But it 's so jam - packed with rousing girl power , it passes the Bechdel Test with ( literally ) flying colors . "
Amy Nicholson of Variety called the film " at once clichéd and exceptional " , praising its female characters and calling the story " emotionally wise " .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
!
scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Category ! scope="col " Recipient(s ) and nominee(s ) ! scope="col " Result ! scope="col " class="unsortable " rowspan=5 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS