HOSTILES ( FILM )
Hostiles is a 2017 American Western film written and directed by Scott Cooper , based on a story by Donald E. Stewart .
It stars Christian Bale , Rosamund Pike , Wes Studi , Ben Foster , Stephen Lang , Jesse Plemons , Rory Cochrane , Adam Beach , Q'orianka Kilcher , Timothée Chalamet and Scott Wilson in his final film role .
It follows a U.S. Army cavalry officer who must escort a Cheyenne war chief and his family back to their home in Montana in 1892 .
The film had its world premiere at the Telluride Film Festival on September 2 , 2017 , and had a limited release in the United States by Entertainment Studios starting December 22 , 2017 , before going wide on January 26 , 2018 .
It received generally positive reviews from critics and grossed $ 35 million worldwide .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1892 , settler Rosalee Quaid and her family are attacked by a Comanche war group who kill and scalp her husband and also shoot and kill her three children .
Only Rosalee manages to escape the attack by hiding in a small rock outcrop in the forest .
In Fort Berringer , New Mexico , Captain Joseph Blocker rounds up an escaping Apache family and brings them back to the fort .
He is then called to the office of Colonel Abraham Biggs , who informs him of his final orders before retirement .
On a directive from President Harrison , he is to escort dying Cheyenne war chief , Yellow Hawk , and four members of his family back to their tribal lands in Montana .
Under threat of a court - martial and loss of his pension , Blocker reluctantly accepts , despite his own gory history with the chief , who was responsible for the death of several of his friends and comrades .
Blocker chooses the detail that will accompany him : his trusty old friend , First Sergeant Thomas Metz , long - time aide Corporal Woodson , and promising newcomer Lieutenant Kidder , fresh from West Point .
Biggs also assigns to the detail a young French - speaking recruit , Private Desjardins .
They begin their journey but Blocker orders a stop and has the two native men put in chains .
The group comes across the charred Quaid house and dead settler .
Inside the house , they find Rosalee and her three " sleeping " children .
Rosalee is initially hostile towards the Cheyenne family because of the attack on her family but agrees to sleep in their camp after some coaxing from Blocker .
She is convinced to bury her family and join Blocker 's detail until their next stop - over .
They are soon ambushed by the Comanche party , resulting in Desjardins 's death and Woodson being seriously wounded .
After this attack , Yellow Hawk convinces Blocker that it is in everyone 's best interest to unchain him and his family .
The next day , the bodies of the surviving Comanche party , who had managed to flee during their previous encounter , are discovered dead .
Blocker deduces that Yellow Hawk and his son , Black Hawk , killed them thanks to Metz allowing them to leave the camp during the night .
After a brief stop at Fort Winslow in Colorado to drop off the wounded Woodson and widow Rosalee , Blocker is asked to take disgraced Sergeant Charles Wills , who killed a family with an ax , to be court - martialed and hanged at his original post along the way to Montana .
Joining Blocker 's company to oversee Wills are Corporal Tommy Thomas and Sergeant Malloy .
Meanwhile , Rosalee decides to continue on with Blocker , despite being offered sanctuary at Fort Winslow until the next supply train at Christmas .
One night , the women are abducted by three fur traders as they wash dishes in the stream by their camp .
The company , assisted by Yellow Hawk and Black Hawk , track down the fur traders , slaughter them and rescue the women ; however , Sergeant Malloy is killed .
During a downpour , Wills fools Kidder into sympathetically undoing his chains , then kills him and escapes , but not before Blocker wounds him .
Metz tracks down and kills Wills , then takes his own life , succumbing to decades of post - traumatic stress and guilt .
They arrive at the chief 's tribal lands in Montana where he succumbs to his illness and is buried .
A man and his three sons ride up , state that they own the land , and order Blocker and the rest of the group to leave with the chief 's body .
Blocker informs them of his Presidential authority but a brutal gun battle ensues leaving only three survivors : Blocker , Rosalee , and Yellow Hawk 's young grandson , Little Bear .
In the final scene , Rosalee and Little Bear reluctantly depart on a train from Montana to Chicago , without Blocker , but , at the last second , Blocker steps onto the back of the train and into the carriage .
CAST
* Christian Bale as Captain Joseph J. Blocker , a veteran of the Indian Wars , with a reputation as a ruthless killer .
* Rosamund Pike as Rosalee Quaid , a suicidal widow who joins Blocker 's detail after the murder of her family by Comanches .
* Wes Studi as Cheyenne Chief Yellow Hawk , an imprisoned and sickly war chief being taken home to die , and the father of Black Hawk and Living Woman .
* Jesse Plemons as Lieutenant Rudy Kidder , a fresh West Point graduate , part of the detail to escort Yellow Hawk home .
* Adam Beach as Black Hawk , Yellow Hawk 's son and Elk Woman 's husband .
* Rory Cochrane as First Sergeant Thomas Metz , a war - weary veteran who is among Blocker 's oldest friends , part of the detail to escort Yellow Hawk Home .
* Peter Mullan as Lieutenant Colonel Ross McCowan , commander of Fort Winslow , Colorado .
* Scott Wilson as Cyrus Lounde , the owner of Yellow Hawk 's ancestral land .
Wilson 's final film appearance before his death in 2018 .
* Paul Anderson as Corporal Tommy Thomas , a soldier from Fort Winslow escorting Wills to his hanging .
* Timothée Chalamet as Private Philippe Desjardins , the youngest member of the detail to escort Yellow Hawk Home .
* Ben Foster as Sergeant Charles Wills , a criminal soldier whom Blocker is charged of escorting to his hanging .
* Jonathan Majors as Corporal Henry Woodson , a soldier who served under Blocker since many years , part of the detail to escort Yellow Hawk Home .
* John Benjamin Hickey as Captain Royce Tolan , a soldier stationed at Fort Berringer alongside Blocker .
* Q'orianka Kilcher as Elk Woman , Black Hawk 's wife .
* Tanaya Beatty as Living Woman , Black Hawk 's sister .
* Stephen Lang as Colonel Abraham Biggs , Blocker 's commanding officer * Bill Camp as Jeremiah Wilks , frontier correspondent for Harper 's Weekly .
* Scott Shepherd as Wesley Quaid , Rosalee 's slaughtered husband .
* Ryan Bingham as Sergeant Malloy , a soldier from Fort Winslow escorting Wills to his hanging .
* Robyn Malcolm as Minnie McCowan , Colonel McCowan 's wife .
* Xavier Horsechief as Little Bear , the young son of Black Hawk and Elk Woman .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The project was announced in February 2016 with Scott Cooper as the director and Christian Bale starring as the main character .
In March , Rosamund Pike was cast , and a production start date of July was announced .
In April , Jesse Plemons was added to the project as a member of the unit and his role was to escort the war chief home .
Wes Studi and Adam Beach were signed in June .
Studi played the dying war chief .
In mid - July , Timothée Chalamet joined the film playing as Private Philippe DeJardin .
Filming began late July in Santa Fe .
Ben Foster , amongst others , were added to the cast at the beginning of filming .
Ryan Bingham , who also stars in the film , wrote and performed " How Shall A Sparrow Fly " for the soundtrack .
Max Richter composed the score for the film , which was released by Deutsche Grammophon .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film had its world premiere at the Telluride Film Festival on September 2 , 2017 .
It was also screened at the Toronto International Film Festival on September 10 , 2017 .
Shortly after , Entertainment Studios acquired U.S. distribution rights to the film .
It was released in a limited release in the United States on December 22 , 2017 , before expanding wide a month later .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Hostiles grossed $ 29.8 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 5.3 million in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 35.1 million .
In the United States and Canada , following several weeks in a limited run where it grossed $ 1.8 million , Hostiles had its wide expansion alongside the release of , and was expected to gross around $ 10 million from 2,813 theaters over the weekend .
It ended up opening to $ 10.1 million , finishing third behind The Death Cure ( $ 24.2 million )
and holdover ( $ 16.1 million ) .
In its second weekend the film dropped 49.5 % to $ 5.1 million , finishing fifth at the box office .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 73 % based on 180 reviews , with a weighted average of 6.8/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads ,
" Hostiles benefits from stunning visuals and a solid central performance from Christian Bale , both of which help elevate its uneven story .
"
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 65 out of 100 , based on 41 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B " on an A+ to F scale , while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave it an overall 72 % positive score .
Following its world premiere at the Telluride Film Festival , Sasha Stone of TheWrap , wrote of the audiences ' reaction to the film , saying , " Riveted by the glorious storytelling of Hostiles , a few Telluride audience members burst into spontaneous applause as it built to its conclusion " .
Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter wrote praise of the film and of the performance of Christian Bale , concluding that the film is an " estimable piece of work grounded by a fine - grain sensibility and an expertly judged lead performance " .
Most of the negative criticism of the movie is directed at its director Scott Cooper .
William Bibbiani of IGN criticized Scott Cooper of wasting the talent of its actors and cinematographer in a " by - the - numbers storyline with a rather obvious message about how it 's harder to be despicable to people after you get to know them " .
He went on to say " Scott Cooper directs Hostiles with an eye for ' greatness ' but the actual material simply is n't deep enough to justify the solemn presentation .
It 's not entertaining , it 's not illuminating , it 's not even complicated .
It 's mostly just a bummer " .
The National Congress of American Indians ( NCAI ) lauded Hostiles for its " authentic representation of Native Peoples " and accurate rendition of Native American languages .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
!
scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Date of ceremony ! scope="col
" Category ! scope="col " Recipient(s ) and nominee(s ) ! scope="col " Result ! scope="col " class="unsortable " REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS