THE RAINS OF CASTAMERE ( SONG ) "
The Rains of Castamere " is a song appearing in the A Song of Ice and Fire novels and in the television series adaptation Game of Thrones .
The song 's lyrics were written by George R. R. Martin in the original novel , and the tune was composed by Ramin Djawadi in 2011 , upon request from the series creators David Benioff and D. B. Weiss .
The song appears multiple times throughout the books and show .
APPEARANCES Section::::Appearances .
The song 's lyrics first appear in the novel A Storm of Swords , in which " The Rains of Castamere " is sung or mentioned several times .
It remembers Tywin Lannister 's victory over House Lannister 's rebellious vassals of Reyne ( " the Reynes of Castamere " ) and Tarbeck , about 40 years before the events of the novels .
The stanza of the song that is reproduced in the novels and adapted for the television series tells of the vassals ' defiance – " And who are you , the proud lord said / That I must bow so low ? " – and the subsequent obliteration of their houses : "
But now the rains weep o'er his hall /
With no one there to hear . "
Late in the novel , the song is performed at the Red Wedding , another massacre of Tywin Lannister 's enemies .
In the TV series , the song was first heard when Tyrion Lannister whistled a small part in the first episode of the second season .
An instrumental version can be heard during Tyrion 's speech right after King Joffrey abandons the battlefield in the same episode .
In season 2 episode 9 , there is a scene Bronn is singing " The Rains of Castamere " among the Lannisters soldiers .
When one of the soldiers ask him " Where 'd you learn the Lannister song ?
" Bronn replies " Drunk Lannisters . "
The contains a rendition of the song " The Rains of Castamere " by the indie rock band The National , sung by their vocalist Matt Berninger .
On the published track list , the title is spelled " The Rains of Castomere " rather than " Castamere " as in the novels .
The spelling is corrected on the printed listing on the liner notes that come with the disc .
It was played over the end credits of the ninth episode , " Blackwater " .
In season 3 , an instrumental version of " The Rains of Castamere " plays over the end credits in episode 7 , " The Bear and the Maiden Fair " .
In episode 9 of season 3 , also titled " The Rains of Castamere " , an instrumental version of the song is played by the musicians at the Red Wedding .
In episode 2 of season 4 of Game of Thrones ( " The Lion and the Rose " ) , Icelandic band Sigur Rós makes a cameo appearance as musicians performing their rendition of " The Rains of Castamere " at the wedding of Joffrey and Margaery .
Joffrey stops them midway by throwing coins at them .
Their version also plays over the closing credits of this episode .
An orchestral rendition of the song appears as House Lannister 's theme throughout seasons 3 and 4 , available in as " A Lannister Always Pays His Debts . "
CREDITS AND PERSONNEL Section::::Credits and personnel .
Personnel adapted from the album liner notes .
* The National – band , primary artist
* Ramin Djawadi – composer , primary artist , producer * David Benioff –
liner notes
* D.B. Weiss –
liner notes
* George R.R. Martin – lyricist SEE ALSO * Game of Thrones
Theme
* Music of Game of Thrones REFERENCES