KARATE
AT THE SUMMER
OLYMPICS Karate will make its debut appearance at the Summer Olympics in 2020 in Tokyo , Japan .
Olympic karate will feature two events , Kumite and Kata .
Sixty competitors from around the world will compete in the Kumite competition and twenty will compete in the Kata competition .
Both divisions of the competition will be split 50/50 between men and women .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
The quest to bring karate to the Olympics was begun in the 1970s by Jacques Delcourt .
In 2009 , in the 121st International Olympic Committee voting , karate did not receive the necessary two - thirds majority vote to become an Olympic sport .
Karate was being considered for the 2020 Olympics , however at a meeting of the IOC 's executive board , held in Russia on May 29 , 2013 , it was decided that karate ( along with wushu and several non - martial arts ) would not be considered for inclusion in 2020 at the IOC 's 125th session in Buenos Aires , Argentina , in September 2013 .
BID FOR INCLUSION Section::::Bid for inclusion .
In September 2015 , karate was included in a shortlist along with baseball , softball , skateboarding , surfing , and sport climbing to be considered for inclusion in the 2020 Summer Olympics ; and in June 2016 , the Executive Board of the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) announced that they would support the proposal to include all of the shortlisted sports in the 2020 Games .
Finally , on August 3 , 2016 , all five sports ( counting baseball and softball together as one sport ) were approved for inclusion in the 2020 Olympic program .
FORMAT AND RULES Section::::Format and rules .
The Olympic karate competition will put eight gold medals in dispute : six for the Kumite ( fight ) competition ( with three weight categories for each sex ) and two for the Kata ( form ) competition ( one for each sex ) .
The main rules for Kumite and Kata competitions are as follows : KUMITE Section::::Kumite .
The individual tournament for the Kumite competition at the World Karate Federation ( WKF ) Karate World Championships is held under a weight class system comprising five divisions each for both men and women .
However , the Kumite competition at the Summer Olympics will consist of just three divisions each , thus : * Weight classes for men : −67 kg , −75 kg , +75 kg
* Weight classes for women : −55 kg , −61 kg , +61 kg
KUMITE RULES Section::::Kumite rules .
In any category , fights last for up to three timed minutes ( i.e. the clock stops every time the referee says yame ) .
During that period , the winner is considered to be the karateka who scores eight points more than their adversary .
If this does not happen , the person with more points at the end of the fight is the winner .
If the fight ends up tied , a decision by the judges determines the winner – there are four side judges plus the referee .
ASSIGNMENT OF POINTS Section::::Assignment of points .
Points are earned as follows :
* Ippon ( three points ) : for hitting the head or neck of the opponent with a kick , or when any technique is applied to a fallen adversary .
* Waza - ari ( two points ) : for applying a kick to the belly , side , back or torso of the opponent .
* Yuko ( one point ) : for delivering a punch with open hand ( uchi ) or closed hand ( tsuki ) to the head , neck , belly , side , back or torso of the opponent .
Strikes below the belt are strictly forbidden and strength must always be controlled as the fighter will receive a warning if they hurt their opponent , points may be lost or there may even be a disqualification if the resulting injury is severe .
Knocking an opponent down to the floor without at least attempting to strike him / her is also liable to be punished .
Points can be lost as follows :
* Chukoku ( first warning ) : for committing a minor infraction for the first time .
As this is only the first warning , points are not awarded to the adversary .
* Keikoku ( second warning ) : for the same minor infraction , or for committing a medium infraction for the first time .
One point is awarded to the adversary .
* Hansoku - chui ( third warning ) : for committing the same minor infraction for the third time , the same medium infraction for a second time , or for committing a major infraction for the first time ( usually excessive contact to vital parts or below the belt , really hurting the opponent ) .
The victory is given to the opponent .
* Hansoku ( fourth and final warning )
: this not only gives victory to the opponent but makes it an 8−0 victory , inflicting serious damage on the team score as a whole .
It is only given for very serious infractions and usually results in future punishments to the athlete , such as a banishment or suspension .
Warnings and punishments are divided into two different categories , the first being for excessive and/or illegal contact and the other for technical violations , such as leaving the koto ( fighting space ) or faking an injury in order to make the referee give the opponent a warning .
KATA Section::::Kata .
Competitors are judged on the speed and power of their techniques .
Under conventional competition rules , one competitor is assigned a blue belt and the other a red belt , and each takes a turn in demonstrating his or her kata .
The outcome of the competition is determined under a flag system , where five judges who each have a blue flag and a red flag raise either to signal which competitor , they believe , won : the one with more flags raised in his or her favour is declared the winner .
However discussions are still ongoing into the judging system , including whether to use a scoring system rather than the flag system .
Due to the immense number of karate styles , each with its own katas , only katas from the styles recognized by the WKF ( Gōjū - ryū , Shitō - ryū , Shotokan and Wadō - ryū ) are allowed in the Olympics .
The lack of representation of many karate styles in the kata competition generates much criticism from practitioners of these styles around the globe .
REFERENCES