RUNAWAYS ( TV SERIES )
Marvel 's Runaways , or simply Runaways , is an American web television series created for Hulu by Josh Schwartz and Stephanie Savage , based on the Marvel Comics superhero team of the same name .
It is set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe ( MCU ) , sharing continuity with the films and other television series of the franchise .
The series is produced by ABC Signature Studios , Marvel Television and Fake Empire Productions , with Schwartz and Savage serving as showrunners .
Rhenzy Feliz , Lyrica Okano , Virginia Gardner , Ariela Barer , Gregg Sulkin , and Allegra Acosta star as the Runaways , six teenagers from different backgrounds who unite against their parents , the Pride , portrayed by Angel Parker , Ryan Sands , Annie Wersching , Kip Pardue , Ever Carradine , James Marsters , Brigid Brannagh , Kevin Weisman , Brittany Ishibashi , and James Yaegashi .
A film from Marvel Studios based on the Runaways began development in May 2008 , before being shelved in 2013 due to the success of The Avengers .
In August 2016 , Marvel Television announced that Runaways had received a pilot order from Hulu , after being developed and written by Schwartz and Savage .
Casting for the Runaways and the Pride were revealed in February 2017 .
Filming on the pilot began in Los Angeles in February 2017 .
The series was officially ordered by Hulu in May 2017 .
The first season was released from November 21 , 2017 , to January 9 , 2018 .
In January 2018 , Runaways was renewed for a 13-episode second season , which is scheduled to be released in its entirety on December 21 , 2018 .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
Six teenagers from different backgrounds unite against a common enemy – their criminal parents , collectively known as the Pride .
In the second season , the teenagers are now on the run from their parents , living on their own and figuring out how to stop the Pride , before learning there may be a mole among them who contacts Jonah , the leader of Pride , aiding his dangerous plan .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN * Rhenzy Feliz as Alex Wilder : A nerd who longs to reunite with his childhood friends .
He has a high intellect and is the leader of the Runaways .
* Lyrica Okano as Nico Minoru :
* Virginia Gardner as Karolina Dean :
* Ariela Barer as Gert Yorkes :
A riot grrrl , social activist , and a member of the Runaways .
She also has a telepathic link with her genetically engineered dinosaur , Old Lace .
* Gregg Sulkin as Chase Stein :
* Allegra Acosta as Molly Hernandez : The youngest member of the Runaways who is characterized by her positive attitude .
Molly discovers she has the ability of superhuman strength and invulnerability .
Evelyn Angelos portrays a young Molly .
* Angel Parker as Catherine Wilder :
Alex 's mother , a successful lawyer , and a member of Pride .
* Ryan Sands as Geoffrey Wilder : Alex 's father and a self - made business man who had a grueling path to his success and is a member of Pride .
* Annie Wersching as Leslie Dean : Karolina 's mother , one of the leaders of the cult - like religious group , the Church of Gibborim , and a member of Pride .
* Kip Pardue as Frank Dean : Karolina 's father , a former teen star who is struggling in his professional acting career and becomes one of the leaders of the Church of Gibborim .
* Ever Carradine as Janet Stein :
Chase 's mother who has a brilliant mind , is " a perfect PTA mom " , and a member of Pride .
Sorel Carradine portrays a young Janet .
* James Marsters as Victor Stein :
* Brigid Brannagh as Stacey Yorkes : Gert 's mother , a bioengineer , and a member of Pride .
* Kevin Weisman as Dale Yorkes : Gert 's father , a bioengineer , and a member of Pride .
* Brittany Ishibashi as Tina Minoru :
* James Yaegashi as Robert Minoru : Nico 's father and a member of Pride who is a brilliant innovator .
RECURRING
* Danielle Campbell as Eiffel : A girl who attends Atlas Academy and looks down on Karolina .
* Pat Lentz as Aura : A member of the Church of Gibborim who works for the Deans .
* Heather Olt as Frances : A member of the Church of Gibborim who works for the Deans .
* DeVaughn Nixon as Darius Davis : An old associate of Geoffrey 's who holds a grudge against him .
* Cody Mayo as Vaughn : Leslie Dean 's assistant at the Church of Gibborim .
* Julian McMahon as Jonah : Section::::Cast and characters .
Section::::Recurring .
Old Lace , a genetically engineered Deinonychus telepathically linked with Gert Yorkes , appears in the series .
The character is portrayed by a puppet that was operated by six people , including one person pumping air through the puppet to show the dinosaur breathing .
Barer called the puppet " incredible ...
You see her emotions .
We do n't not make use of that . "
GUEST * Zayne Emory as Brandon : A member of Chase 's lacrosse team .
* Timothy Granaderos as Lucas : A member of Chase 's lacrosse team .
*
Nicole Wolf as Destiny Gonzalez :
A young woman who joins the Church of Gibborim and is sacrificed soon after by the Pride .
* Nathan Davis Jr. as Andre :
An associate of Darius ' who is used as a sacrifice for the Pride .
* Alex Fernandez as Flores : An LAPD lieutenant who works under the Pride .
* Ryan Doom as Alphona : Chase 's lacrosse coach .
* Devan Chandler Long as Kincaid : A man hired by Tina Minoru for devious purposes .
* Kimmy Shields as a supporter of Gert 's club .
* Anjelika Washington as a supporter of Gert 's club .
* Cooper Mothersbaugh as a supporter of Gert 's club .
* Amanda Suk as Amy Minoru : Nico 's sister , Alex 's best friend and Tina and Robert 's daughter who died prior to the beginning of the series .
Chandler Shen portrays a young Amy .
* Vladimir Caamaño as Gene Hernandez : A geologist who is Molly 's father and a former member of Pride who died in a fire .
* Carmen Serano as Alice Hernandez : A geologist who is Molly 's mother and a former member of Pride who died in a fire .
* Marlene Forte as Graciela Aguirre : A distant relative of Molly 's .
* Jan Luis Castellanos as Topher : A " tough and complicated kid " who joins the Runaways .
Section::::Guest .
Stan Lee makes a cameo appearance as a limo driver .
EPISODES
SEASON 1
( 2017–18 ) SEASON 2
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Brian K. Vaughan was hired to write a screenplay for Marvel Studios in May 2008 , based on his comic book Runaways .
In April 2010 , Marvel hired Peter Sollett to direct the film , and a month later Drew Pearce signed on to write a new script .
Development on the film was put on hold the following October , and Pearce explained in September 2013 that the Runaways film had been shelved due to the success of The Avengers ; the earliest the film could be made
was for Phase Three of the Marvel Cinematic Universe .
In October 2014 , after announcing Marvel 's Phase Three films without Runaways , Marvel Studios president Kevin Feige said the project was " still an awesome script that exists in our script vault ...
In our television and future film discussions , it 's always one that we talk about , because we have a solid draft there .
[ But ] we ca n't make them all . "
Marvel Television , based at ABC Studios , was waiting for the right showrunner before moving forward with a television take on the characters .
Josh Schwartz and Stephanie Savage , whose company Fake Empire Productions had an overall deal with ABC , independently brought up the property during a general meeting with the studio , and , by August 2016 , the pair had spent a year conversing with Marvel about turning Runaways into a television series .
That month , it was announced that streaming service Hulu had ordered a pilot episode and scripts for a full season of Runaways , to be co - produced by Marvel Television , ABC Signature Studios , and Fake Empire Productions .
Hulu was believed to already have " an eye toward a full - season greenlight " .
Executive producer Jeph Loeb felt " it was an easy decision " to have Hulu air the series over the other networks Marvel Television works with , because " [ w]e were very excited about the possibility of joining a network that was young and growing in the same way that when we went to Netflix when it was young and growing on the original side .
It really feels like we 're in the right place at the right time with the right show .
" Loeb and Marvel Television were also impressed by the success of Hulu 's The Handmaid 's Tale , which helped further justify the decision .
Schwartz and Savage wrote the pilot , and serve as showrunners on the series , as well as executive producers alongside Loeb and Jim Chory .
In May 2017 , Runaways received a 10-episode series order from Hulu at their annual advertising upfront presentation .
Fake Empire 's Lis Rowinski produces the series , and Vaughan serves as an executive consultant .
On this , Vaughan noted he " did a little consulting early in the process " , but felt the series " found the ideal ' foster parents ' in Josh Schwartz and Stephanie Savage … [ who ] lovingly adapted [ the comics ] into a stylish drama that feels like contemporary Los Angeles " .
He also praised the cast , crew and writers working on the series , and felt the pilot looked " like an Adrian Alphona comic " , referring to the artist who worked with Vaughan when he created the characters .
Loeb said that it had been Schwartz and Savage who had asked that Vaughan be involved , and said that this was something that " a lot of showrunners do n't immediately gravitate towards " .
In discussions with Vaughan , Marvel found that he " really wanted to be involved and make sure that it was done , not just properly , but in a way that it would last 100 episodes " .
On January 8 , 2018 , Hulu renewed the series for a 13-episode second season .
WRITING Section::::Writing .
Schwartz was a fan of the Runaways comic for some time , and introduced it to Savage , saying , " When you 're a teenager , everything feels like life and death , and the stakes in this story — really felt like that . "
Loeb described the series as The O.C. of the Marvel Cinematic Universe ( MCU ) , which Schwartz said meant " treating the problems of teenagers as if they are adults " and having the series " feel true and authentic to the teenage experience , even in this heightened context " .
Loeb noted that it would deal with modern political issues by saying , " This is a time when figures of authority are in question , and this is a story where teenagers are at that age where they see their parents as fallible and human .
Just because someone is in charge , does n't mean that they 're here to do good .
"
The producers did note that the series would explore the parents ' perspective as well , with the pilot telling the story from the Runaways ' perspective , and the second episode showing the same story from their parents'—the Pride's — perspective , with the two stories converging midway through the first season .
Schwartz likened the tone of Runaways to that of the comics it was based on , calling it " so distinct " , saying much of the tone Vaughn used when writing the comics overlapped with the tones Schwartz and Savage like to work in .
The pair were excited by the freedom given to them by Hulu over the usual broadcasters they were used to working with , such as allowing the children to swear in the show , not having set lengths for each episode , and being able to explore the parents ' story ; Hulu wanted " something that felt broad and where we could push the envelope in places " .
Schwartz described the series as a coming - of - age story and a family drama , with focus on the characters that can lead to long stretches of the series not featuring super powers , so " if you did n't see the show title , you would n't know that you were in a Marvel show for long stretches ...
That was our aesthetic starting place , but there are episodes where there 's some good [ Marvel ] stuff . "
Speaking to the second season , Schwartz felt the series would " accelerate " since the season would be following the kids on the run , saying , "
Our focus shifts to these kids and trying to survive in the streets … there 's a greater sense of tension and momentum in keeping with where we are in this part of the story . "
He added that the kids ' experience on the run would force them to grow up and make them confront and deal with adult themes quickly .
He added that the relationship between Nico and Karolina that began at the end of the first season would be " the emotional core " of the second .
As for the parents in the season , Schwartz described them as racing against the clock " to find their kids before something catastrophic potentially could occur " .
Since the kids know about their powers , they are utilized more in the season .
Additionally , the hostel the kids move into is a dilapidated mansion under Griffith Park .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
In February 2017 , Marvel announced the casting of the Runaways , with Rhenzy Feliz as Alex Wilder , Lyrica Okano as Nico Minoru , Virginia Gardner as Karolina Dean , Ariela Barer as Gert Yorkes , Gregg Sulkin as Chase Stein , and Allegra Acosta as Molly Hernandez .
Shortly after , Marvel announced the casting of the Pride , with Ryan Sands as Geoffrey Wilder , Angel Parker as Catherine Wilder , Brittany Ishibashi as Tina Minoru , James Yaegashi as Robert Minoru , Kevin Weisman as Dale Yorkes , Brigid Brannagh as Stacey Yorkes , Annie Wersching as Leslie Dean , Kip Pardue as Frank Dean , James Marsters as Victor Stein , and Ever Carradine as Janet Stein .
Loeb praised casting director Patrick Rush , explaining that all of the series regulars for Runaways were the producers ' first choice for the role .
The majority of the children are portrayed by " fresh faces " , which was an intentional choice .
By August 2017 , Julian McMahon had been cast in the recurring role of Jonah .
For the second season , Schwartz noted that " really popular , exciting characters " from the comics would appear .
In October 2018 , it was announced that Jan Luis Castellanos had joined the cast as Topher .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Filming on the pilot began by February 10 , 2017 , in Los Angeles , under the working title Rugrats , and concluded on March 3 .
Director Brett Morgen was given free rein by Marvel and Hulu to establish the look of the series , and wanted to create a feel that was " very grounded and authentic " .
He also looked to differentiate between the hand - held , gritty world of the Runaways and the more stylistic world of the Pride .
He felt the latter could be explored more in the series moving forward , but was not available to direct any more episodes of the season .
Following completion of the pilot and the show 's pick - up to series , there was concern among the cast and crew that the impending writers ' strike would prevent the series to move forward .
However , the strike did not happen , and filming on the rest of the season began at the end of June , again in Los Angeles .
Production on the season had concluded by October 21 .
Production on the second season began the week of April 23 , 2018 , again in Los Angeles under the working title Rugrats .
Filming on the season continued until late September 2018 .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
In May 2017 , Siddhartha Khosla was hired to compose the music for the series .
Khosla said that , due to his history as a songwriter , his scoring process involves " working on these song - stories and weaving them through different episodes " .
He described the Runaways score as being " completely synthesized " , utilizing analog synthesizers from the 1980s , specifically the Roland Juno-60 and Oberheim Electronics ' synths .
Khosla compared the " alternative feel " of his score to Depeche Mode , adding " there is an element of rebellion , so sonically going for something that is a little bit outside the box , non - traditional , I felt was an appropriate approach .
I feel like I 'm making art on this show .
" Alex Patsavas serves as music supervisor , having done so on all of Schwartz and Savage 's previous series .
On January 12 , 2018 , a soundtrack from the first season consisting of 12 licensed tracks plus two by Khosla , was released digitally .
Additionally , the original score for the series was released digitally on January 26 .
All music by Siddhartha Khosla : MARVEL CINEMATIC UNIVERSE TIE - INS
Section::::Marvel Cinematic Universe tie - ins .
Loeb confirmed in July 2017 that the series would be set in the MCU , but that the show 's characters would not be concerned with the actions of the Avengers , for example , saying , " Would you be following Iron Man [ on social media ] or would you be following someone your own age ?
The fact that they 've found each other and they 're going through this mystery together at the moment is what we 're concerned about , not what Captain America is doing . "
The showrunners considered the series ' connection to the MCU to be " liberating " , as it allowed them to set the series in a universe where superheroics and fantasy are already established and do not need to be explained to the audience .
However , the series does not draw attention to " the idea that maybe other people have powers too " .
Schwartz said , " You could read it as because they live in California , and [ The Avengers ] took place in New York , or because it did n't take place in our world .
Marvel 's position is everything is connected , but our show is trying to walk that line where the reality our kids are facing , they are facing for the first time . "
He also said they " were very capable of telling the story that we wanted to tell independent of any of the other Marvel stories that are out there . "
Loeb added that there were no plans to crossover across networks with the similarly themed Cloak & Dagger on Freeform and New Warriors , as Marvel wanted the series to find its footing before further connecting with other elements of the universe , though " You 'll see things that comment on each other ; we try to touch base wherever we can ... things that are happening in L.A. are not exactly going to be affecting what 's happening in New Orleans [ where Cloak & Dagger is set ] ...
It 's being aware of it and trying to find a way [ to connect ] that makes sense . "
Speaking to the second season , Schwartz said there would be a reference late in the season "
that will probably be our first real bread crumb that connects to the MCU . "
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Runaways premiered its first three episodes on Hulu in the United States on November 21 , 2017 , with the first season consisting of 10 episodes , and concluding on January 9 , 2018 .
The series aired on Showcase in Canada , premiering on November 22 , and aired on Syfy in the United Kingdom premiering on April 18 , 2018 .
The premiere episode made its broadcast debut in the United States on Freeform on August 2 , 2018 , following the airing of the first season finale of Cloak & Dagger ; the airing is part of Freeform 's ongoing marketing partnership with Hulu .
The second season , consisting of 13 episodes , is scheduled to be released in its entirety on December 21 , 2018 .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
Cast members and Schwartz and Savage appeared at New York Comic Con 2017 to promote the series , where a trailer for the series was revealed , along with a screening of the first episode .
The series had its red carpet premiere at the Regency Bruin Theatre in Westwood , Los Angeles on November 16 , 2017 .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported an 85 % approval rating with an average rating of 7.74/10 based on 56 reviews .
The website 's consensus reads , " Earnest , fun , and more balanced than its source material , Runaways finds strong footing in an over - saturated genre . "
Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned a score of 68 out of 100 based on 22 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Reviewing the first two episodes of the series , Joseph Schmidt of ComicBook.com praised the show for its faithfulness to the comics , but also for some of the changes it made , appreciating the increased focus on the parents .
He thought the cast portraying the Runaways was " pretty spot on " , but " many of the parents are scene stealers " , highlighting the performances of Marsters , Wersching , and Pardue .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Recipient !
Result ! scope="col " class="unsortable " REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS