JAB HARRY MET SEJAL Jab Harry Met Sejal
( English : When Harry Met Sejal ) is a 2017 Indian romantic comedy film written and directed by Imtiaz Ali .
It features Anushka Sharma and Shah Rukh Khan in the lead roles , their third collaboration after Rab Ne Bana Di Jodi ( 2008 ) and Jab Tak Hai Jaan ( 2012 ) .
Pre - production of the film begun in April 2015 and principal photography commenced in August 2016 in Prague , Amsterdam , Vienna , Lisbon and Budapest .
The film received generally negative response and did not perform well financially in India , though it did perform well overseas .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Harinder " Harry " Singh Nehra ( Shah Rukh Khan ) is a tourist guide , currently working in Amsterdam .
He is shown to be a lonely man and a " cheap womaniser " as he calls himself , also with his clients and thus risking his job , but is a friendly and helpful guide .
After dropping a family at the airport , Harry comes across Sejal Zaveri ( Anushka Sharma ) , a member of the same family , who has lost her engagement ring and wants him to help her .
Harry initially does n't want to , but to avoid an eventual complain of Sejal to his agency that might make him lose his job , he reluctantly agrees to help .
In due course of time while searching for the ring , they become friendly and he tells her that he had left his village , Nurmahal and came to Canada to become a singer , which did not work out and that is how he slowly became a tour guide .
Both Harry and Sejal travel to places in Europe where he had initially taken the family , in search of the ring .
During this , Harry ends up falling in love with Sejal , but does not reveal it to her , knowing that she is engaged to Rupen ( Kavi Shastri ) .
They soon learn that a criminal , Ghyassuddin Mohammed Qureshi " Gas " ( Chandan Roy Sanyal ) , has stolen the ring .
They go to Gas to retrieve the ring but Harry gets thrashed by Gas ' men .
Later , while looking for antiseptics in her bag for Harry , Sejal finds the ring and realises that the ring was in her bag all along .
However , she does not tell Harry , as she wants to spend some more time with him and is unknowingly falling in love with him as well .
The next day , Harry and Sejal fly to Frankfurt for the wedding between Harry 's friend Mayank ( Aru Krishansh Verma ) and Irina ( Evelyn Sharma ) , where both get questioned by them about their relationship , seeing their evident chemistry .
After the wedding , Harry and Sejal get into an argument about it .
Harry does n't admit his feelings , as he feels he is not good enough for her
and she decides to fly back home .
At the airport , Sejal shows Harry the ring and tells him that she found it few days ago and that it was in her bag all along .
He asks her to take care and bids her goodbye .
She returns to India and he returns to his work , but begins to miss her and gets depressed , not being able to concentrate during work .
On Mayank 's insistence , Harry flies to Mumbai to go to her wedding in hope to talk to her about his unrevealed feelings before she marries .
On reaching the venue , he learns that Sejals 's marriage was called off .
He walks out to find her sitting outside .
They eventually share their feelings for each other and kiss and go to Harry 's village , Nurmahal in Punjab , where he reunites with his family and marries Sejal .
CAST
* Anushka Sharma as Sejal Zaveri * Shah Rukh Khan as Harinder " Harry " Singh Nehra * Aru Krishansh Verma as Mayank * Chandan Roy Sanyal as Ghyassuddin Mohammed Qureshi ( Gas )
* Evelyn Sharma as Irina
* Kavi Shastri as Rupen ,
Sejal 's fiancé DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Jab Harry Met Sejal was initially conceived about a man trying to commit suicide .
However , after Khan met Ali , the former suggested to revitalise the story by making it a more jolly film .
Production of the film began in April 2016 and plans to filming were announced in the first part of August 2016 , when the film had the working title " Production No . 52 " .
Sharma required several months of diction training to prepare herself for her role , as her character is from Gujarat .
She describes her character as " very superficial , does n't have any depth as a person .
There is no similarity with me .
But her morals and values of self - respect are something that I can relate to .
But otherwise , the character is quite impulsive by nature . "
The film underwent a lot of name changes throughout its production phase from The Ring to Rahnuma to Raula until it was finalised with Jab Harry Met Sejal .
When the title of the film was finally revealed , it received considerable backlash from people who accused that it must be a copy of the 1989 Hollywood iconic film When Harry Met Sally ... or that it must have been inspired by it .
However , contrary to popular beliefs , the two films have no similarity or connection with one another except both falls under the same genre and the two protagonist start off as strangers .
Khan explained , " When Harry Met Sally ... is one of the greatest love stories ever made in the history of world cinema .
Our film on the other hand , is quite original , a fun space love story by Imtiaz Ali .
But it is a takeoff from there as that movie is a classic .
It is a way to attribute . "
In an interview with The Indian Express , Khan discussed about the possible epilogue of the movie ; the couple had three children and moved to a small town for some time .
Sejal then works as a lawyer while Harry takes time off and writes a book .
The former takes the role of a working partner while the latter looks after the children .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Filming began in late August 2016 in Prague and continued in Amsterdam & Budapest from September 2016 .
Filming locations include multiple locations in Europe , as well as in Punjab .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The music of the film is composed by Pritam while the lyrics have been penned by Irshad Kamil .
The first song of the film titled as " Radha " sung by Shahid Mallya and Sunidhi Chauhan was released on 21 June 2017 .
The second song " Beech Beech Mein " sung by Arijit Singh , Shalmali Kholgade and Shefali Alvares was released on 3 July 2017 .
The third song " Safar " sung by Arijit Singh was released on 10 July 2017 .
The fourth song " Butterfly " sung by Dev Negi , Chauhan , Aman Trikha and Nooran Sisters was released on 13 July 2017 .
The fifth song " Hawayein " sung by Singh was unveiled on 26 July 2017 .
The sixth and last song titled " Phurrr " was composed by the American DJ Diplo and Pritam .
It was sung by DJ Diplo , Pritam , Mohit Chauhan and Tushar Joshi and was released on 3 August 2017 .
The soundtrack was released by Sony Music India on 3 August 2017 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Debarati S Sen of The Times of India commented that they have made an " enjoyable album " , " which captures the usual genres that characterises a typical Bollywood film , well enough " .
Joginder Tuteja of Bollywood Hungama rated 4 out of 5 stars to the album .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film was initially set for an August 11 , 2017 release .
However , it was later moved a week earlier to August 4 to avoid the movie averting a possible box office clash .
Its release date in Dubai and United Arab Emirates was pushed from early Thursday morning – which has been the norm for Bollywood films – to Friday evening to prevent pirated versions of the film or its spoilers from getting leaked .
However , after a backlash , it was decided to release it on its original release date , August 3 , at 6 PM GST .
The film was released on 3400 screens worldwide .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Anita Iyer of Khaleej Times rated the film 2.5 out of 5 stars and said , " The movie goes through its ebb and flow , and all you can do is enjoy the good bits , till they last . "
Manjusha Radhakrishnan of Gulf News also rated it 2.5 stars out of 5 , saying " The climax is n't ground - breaking , however , the cinematography that highlights the beauty of a handful European countries is pleasing to watch . "
Yahoo gave the movie 3.5 stars out of 5 calling it a complete entertainer .
Koimoi gave Jab Harry Met Sejal 3.5 stars out of 5 , praising the performances and direction .
The Times Of India gave the movie 3 stars of out 5 and wrote , " Sound advice here would be that you actually buy yourself a tour ticket to Europe and soak in the sights for real .
But , if you want to settle for a cheaper option of touring the continent inside a cinema hall , buy yourself a JHMS ticket and get transported to the land of make - believe captured indulgently by cinematographer K U Mohanan , with the added advantage of a Punjabi ` munda ' playing your friend , philosopher , lover and guide .
"
Filmfare Magazine gave the movie 3 stars out of 5 stating that , " JHMS is a happy romantic comedy that you can sing and dance along with .
Pritam 's music is a stand out feature .
The performances are really strong " .
NDTV gave JHMS 2/5 and wrote , " It is cinema 's equivalent of a shiny bauble that glitters wholly in vain .
Watch it only if you fancy a vicarious romp through Europe with an off - colour megastar trying hard to get going " .
Shubhra Gupta , critic of Indian Express gave JHMS 1.5 stars out of 5 stars while calling it a dud .
Giving Jab Harry Met Sejal 2 stars out of 5 , Hindustan Times wrote , " Lethargic storytelling kills Shah Rukh Khan , Anushka Sharma 's film .
It 's a big disappointment to see Shah Rukh Khan returning to his comfort zone and yet not performing on top of his powers . "
Bollywood Hungama gave the film 2 stars out of 5 and wrote , " Jab Harry Met Sejal has its moments .
But the film is riddled with cliches and flaws that takes the film down , thanks to the poor script . "
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The film 's box office gross is , including in India and overseas .
The film under - performed at the domestic box office .
However , the film was an overseas success , grossing US$ 10 million overseas , making it the year 's second highest overseas grosser , behind only Raees , another Shah Rukh Khan starrer .
DOMESTIC
Section::::Domestic .
The film collected 15.25 crore on opening day , becoming the lowest opener for a Shah Rukh Khan film in three years .
On the second day , it collected 15 crores , followed by its third day 's collection of 15.50 crores , bringing its first weekend 's collection to 45.75 crores , and making it 2017 's sixth - highest first - weekend - collecting Bollywood film in the domestic market .
Nevertheless , the weekend box office collection of the film did not manage to cross 50 crores , and it emerged as one of the lowest openers of Shah Rukh Khan in recent years .
OVERSEAS Section::::Overseas .
On the first day , the film collected from 27 screens in Australia , from 20 screens in New Zealand , from 104 screens in the United Kingdom , from 252 screens in the United States and from 26 screens in Canada .
On the second day , the film collected from 10 screens in Australia , from 16 screens in New Zealand , from 105 screens in the UK , from 251 screens in the US and from 26 screens in Canada .
On the first Sunday , it collected from 31 screens in Australia , from 21 screens in New Zealand , from 106 screens in the UK , from 249 screens in the US and from 26 screens in Canada .
On the fourth day of release , the film collected from 23 screens in Australia and from 18 screens in New Zealand .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Award Ceremony !
Category !
Recipient !
Result !
Ref.(s )
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Jab Harry Met Sejal at Bollywood Hungama