SALT POISONING Salt poisoning is an intoxication resulting from the excessive intake of sodium ( usually as sodium chloride ) in either solid form or in solution ( saline water , including brine , brackish water , or seawater ) .
In medicine , the circumstance of salt poisoning is most frequently encountered in children or infants who may be made to consume excessive amounts of table salt .
At least one instance of murder of a hospitalized child by salt poisoning has been reported .
Too much salt intake in adults can also occur from the drinking of seawater in survival situations or the drinking of soy sauce .
Salt poisoning has also been seen in a number of adults with mental health problems .
SYMPTOMS AND PHYSIOLOGY Section::::Symptoms and physiology .
Salt poisoning typically results in a feeling of confusion and jitteriness ; more severe degrees of intoxication can cause seizures and coma .
Death can result if medical intervention is not forthcoming .
These symptoms are generally a consequence of hypernatremia — an abnormally high sodium level in the blood .
( There are myriad causes of hypernatremia , which is frequently encountered in medical practice ; salt poisoning is not a common cause . )
Early on , the intoxicant will cause a strong feeling of thirst , followed by weakness , nausea , and loss of appetite .
More severe symptoms ensue , including confusion , muscle twitching , and bleeding in or around the brain .
Death results by the swelling of the brain against the skull .
( Normal serum sodium levels are 135 – 145 mEq / liter ( 135 – 145 mmol / L ) .
Severe symptoms typically only occur when levels are above 160 mEq / L. )
The human renal system actively regulates sodium chloride in the blood within a very narrow range around 9 g / L ( 0.9 % by weight ) .
Accidentally consuming small quantities of clean seawater is not harmful , especially if the seawater is taken along with a larger quantity of fresh water .
However , drinking seawater to maintain hydration is counterproductive ; more water must be excreted to eliminate the salt ( via urine ) than the amount of water obtained from the seawater itself .
In most open waters concentrations vary somewhat around typical values of about 3.5 % ; drinking seawater temporarily increases blood 's NaCl concentration , which signals the kidney to excrete sodium .
However , seawater 's sodium concentration is above the kidney 's maximum concentrating ability .
Eventually the blood 's sodium concentration rises to toxic levels , removing water from cells and interfering with nerve conduction , ultimately producing fatal seizure and cardiac arrhythmia .
SEA WATER POISONING Section::::Sea water poisoning .
Survival manuals consistently advise against drinking seawater .
A summary of 163 life raft voyages estimated the risk of death at 39 % for those who drank seawater , compared to 3 % for those who did not .
The effect of seawater intake on rats confirmed the negative effects of drinking seawater when dehydrated .
( In contrast to humans , pelagic birds and other sea animals can ( and must ) drink sea water without ill effects . )
Historical experiences
Some historians have suggested that the mysterious sicknesses afflicting the early English colonists at Jamestown , Virginia ( 1607–1610)—which nearly extinguished the settlement — reflect sea water poisoning .
The settlers arrived in the spring , when the James River water was relatively fresh , but by summer a drought of historical magnitude had rendered it much more brackish .
The historical geographer Carville Earle , among others , holds to this view .
The temptation to drink seawater was greatest for sailors who had expended their supply of fresh water , and were unable to capture enough rainwater for drinking .
This frustration was described famously by a line from Samuel Taylor Coleridge 's epic poem The Rime of the Ancient Mariner ( 1798 ) : Although humans can not survive on seawater alone — and , indeed , will sicken quickly if they try — some people have claimed that up to two cups a day , mixed with fresh water in a 2:3 ratio , produces no ill effect .
During the 18th century , British physician Richard Russell ( 1687–1759 ) advocated the practice as part of medical therapy in his country .
In the 20th century , René Quinton ( 1866–1925 ) , in France , would also endorse the practice .
Currently , the practice is widely used in Nicaragua and other countries , supposedly taking advantage of the latest medical discoveries . )
In his 1948 book , Kon - Tiki , Thor Heyerdahl reported drinking seawater mixed with fresh in a 2:3 ratio during the 1947 expedition .
The French physician Alain Bombard ( 1924–2005 ) survived an ocean crossing ( 1952–53 ) in a small Zodiac rubber boat using mainly raw fish meat , which contains about 40 percent water ( like most living tissues ) , as well as small amounts of seawater and other provisions harvested from the ocean .
His findings were challenged , but an alternative explanation was not given .
A few years later , an American sailor and adventurer , William Willis ( 1893–1968 ) , claimed to have drunk two cups of seawater and one cup of fresh per day for 70 days without ill effect when he lost part of his water supply .
REFERENCES