UC SANTA CRUZ BANANA SLUGS
The UC Santa Cruz Banana Slugs are the athletic teams that represent the University of California , Santa Cruz .
The Banana Slugs compete in Division III of the NCAA as an independent member .
There are fifteen varsity sports – men 's and women 's basketball , tennis , soccer , volleyball , swimming and diving , cross country , and women 's golf .
UCSC teams have been Division III nationally ranked in tennis , soccer , men 's volleyball , and swimming .
UCSC maintains a number of successful club sides .
In 2016 , due to a mounting debt in funding of the athletic program , the university polled its students on whether or not they would approve an increase in tuition which would be necessary to maintain the athletic program .
There was a significant doubt that the students would approve this increase .
Contrary to the predictions , a majority of the students approved a significant addition to their annual tuition to maintain the existence of the athletic program .
VARSITY SPORTS Section::::Varsity sports .
Basketball Basketball UCSC participates in men 's and women 's basketball , cross country , golf , soccer , swimming & diving , tennis , track & field , and volleyball .
In the past , it has also participated in water polo .
BASKETBALL Section::::Basketball .
Starting in 2013 , both men 's and women 's basketball teams play downtown at the Kaiser Permanente Arena .
CROSS COUNTRY Section::::Cross Country .
The Women 's Cross Country team has finished as high as 5th at the NCAA West Regional Championships in 2014 with 7th place finishes in 2008 , 2015 , and 2016 .
The best finish by the Men 's Cross Country team at Regionals was second in 2017 , with 6th place finishes in 1985 , 1989 , and 2013 and 7th place finishes in 2014 and 2016 .
SOCCER Section::::Soccer .
The Banana Slugs were runners - up in men 's soccer NCAA Division III Men 's Soccer Championships in 2004 .
TENNIS
Section::::Tennis .
By defeating Emory to win the 2007 NCAA Division III National Championship in men 's tennis , UCSC won their sixth men 's tennis team championships .
They won their seventh championship in 2009 beating Amherst College in the finals .
TRACK & FIELD Section::::Track & Field .
UCSC added a woman 's track & field varsity program in 2012 .
In 2016 , it added a men 's varsity program as well .
In 2017 , the Slugs track & field team competed in all event groups , for both men and women , for the first time .
VOLLEYBALL Section::::Volleyball .
In 2012 , the Men 's Volleyball Team made a Division III NCAA Semifinal 's appearance .
In 2013 , the Men 's Volleyball Team qualified for a second appearance to the Division III NCAA Tournament .
UCSC is one of the largest but one of the least funded NCAA Division III members .
The Women 's volleyball team has made two appearances in the NCAA tournament-2013 and 2015 .
WATER POLO Section::::Water Polo .
In the 2006 season , the men 's water polo team won the Division III championship , as well as an overall NCAA ranking of 19th in the nation .
However , both the men and women 's water polo teams went to club status in 2008 due to budget constraints .
CLUB SPORTS Section::::Club sports .
In addition to its NCAA sports , UCSC maintains a number of successful club sides including its women 's rugby NCAA Division team , which won the Division II National Collegiate Championship during its 2005 season and has competed at nationals several times since , most recently in 2010 and 2013 .
However , many other club teams exist such as soccer , lacrosse , baseball , rugby , softball , and muggle quidditch .
INTRAMURAL ATHLETICS Section::::Intramural athletics .
Although UCSC never had a track , the residential colleges regularly competed in an improvised " Slug Run " every spring from 1967 to 1982 , though the Run now is a community event and fundraiser event hosted by the cross - country club for much needed fund to pay for entry fees , hotel , and transportation to race .
Approximately 25 % of the student population participates in intramural athletics , which tend to be better funded than the intercollegiate athletic programs .
CHAMPIONSHIPS APPEARANCES Section::::Championships .
Section::::Appearances .
The UC Santa Cruz Banana Slugs competed in the NCAA Tournament across 11 active sports ( 5 men 's and 6 women 's ) 105 times at the Division III level .
TEAM Section::::Team .
The Banana Slugs of UC Santa Cruz earned 7 NCAA team championships at the Division III level .
*
Men 's ( 7 )
* Tennis ( 7 ) : 1989 , 1995 , 1996 , 1998 , 2005 , 2007 , 2009
Results Below are eight national club team championships :
* Women 's rugby – Division II ( 1 ) :
2006
( USA Rugby )
* Co - ed sailing ( 1 ) : 1976 ( ICSA ) * Men 's tennis – Division III ( 3 ) : 2001 , 2007 , 2010 ( ITA )
* Men 's ultimate ( 1 ) : 1991
( USA Ultimate )
* Women 's ultimate ( 2 ) : 1994 , 1995
( USA Ultimate )
INDIVIDUAL
MASCOT
Section::::Mascot .
UCSC 's mascot is the banana slug ( specifically , Ariolimax dolichophallus ) .
In 1974 the UCSC club soccer team chose the mascot the " Banana Slugs " .
UCSC had no formal team sports at the time , therefore they had no mascot .
Three team members , Larry DeGhetaldi , Fred Bicknell , Sven Steinmo and their roommate , Richard Hedges , chose to name the team the Banana Slugs before an All Cal tournament .
They felt that UCSC should have a mascot too .
The team 's unusual name was noted by the San Jose Mercury News after the team suffered a humiliating defeat against the San Jose State Spartans .
Several years later , when the club basketball team became more formalized ( with a coach and expanded schedule ) , the athletic director at the time , Terry Warner , informed the team that they needed to have a mascot and that it had been chosen to be the Sea Lions .
The team summarily rejected that name , claiming to not need any mascot .
As such , their uniforms simply said " UCSC " on them .
In 1981 , when the university began more formally participating in NCAA intercollegiate sports , the then - chancellor and some student athletes declared the mascot to be the sea lions .
Most students disliked the new mascot and offered an alternative mascot , the banana slug .
In 1986 , students voted via referendum to declare the banana slug the official mascot of UCSC – a vote the chancellor refused to honor , arguing that only athletes should choose the mascot .
When a poll of athletes showed that they , too , wanted to be Slugs , the chancellor relented .
The June 16 , 1986 , issue of People magazine featured a full - page spread dedicated to the selection of the Banana Slug as the official mascot of UCSC .
In February 2008 , ESPN Sports Travel named the UCSC Banana Slug as one of the ten best nicknames in college basketball .
The " Fiat Slug " logo prominently featured on campus is a trademark of UCSC owned by the Regents .
It was developed by Bernt Wahl and two other students during the mascot controversy , who later incorporated as " Oxford West " and licensed their design from the Regents to produce clothing inspired by the university .
The slug also is featured along with the school 's logo on Vincent Vega 's T - shirt in the 1994 film Pulp Fiction .
A sea lion statue can still be seen in front of the Thimann Hall lecture building .
2016
REFERENDUM Section::::2016 referendum .
By 2016 the athletic program had been operating at a deficit for many years , with its most recent expanding rising to $ 2 million per year even though its budget had remained at $ 1.4 million .
Even so UCSC had the lowest operating budget in the NCAA Division III league .
With few exceptions , most Banana Slugs teams had consistently very low attendance at their matches .
At the same time the university was undergoing budget cuts that required a proportionate decrease in operating costs .
Because of apparent lack of student support for college athletics , it was decided that it would be reasonable to channel the funds to other areas .
UC Santa Cruz Provost Allison Galloway stated that under the current circumstances the university had to decide whether to keep funding the athletic program or to be able to maintain student services for an increasing student population .
The administration saw that the only available option to maintain the athletic program was to significantly increase the student athletic funding tuition fee from $ 5 per quarter to $ 90 per quarter , which would total to $ 270 for the academic year .
In comparison , UC Berkeley fee totaled to $ 110 per year , UC San Diego fee was $ 268 , and UC Davis fee was $ 150 .
Both UC Berkeley and UC Davis were NCAA Division I programs and while UC San Diego was not D - I but D - II
its spending budget was $ 9 million , more than 6 times UCSC 's .
UCSC 's increase of the fee to $ 270 would only raise the budget to $ 2 million .
An online poll was scheduled for the end of May , where students would be asked if they were willing to approve the increase .
Due to opposition to the proposal by the university 's athletes and coaches as well as alumni , it was considered to be very unlikely that such a significant increase would pass .
On May 24th 2016 , it was announced that a record 43 % of undergraduates participated in the referendum with 63 % approving the significant fee increase in concept .
The measure did not actually create the new fee , however , but instead tested the support that students would have for a potential fee .
The actual referendum to create the new fee waited a year , until 2017 .
2017
REFERENDUM Section::::2017 referendum .
In May , 2017 , students approved Measure 68 , the Intercollegiate Athletics and Athletics Activities Access Fee , a new fee of $ 38.50 per student per quarter .
39.23 % of the student body cast votes , and 79.84 % of votes were in favor of the new fee .
The fee expires in Spring 2042 .
The measure is expected to provide athletics with $ 1.5 million per year .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS