BEIRUT ( FILM ) Beirut , also known as The Negotiator ( UK ) , is a 2018 American espionage thriller film directed by Brad Anderson and written by Tony Gilroy .
Set in 1982 during the Lebanese Civil War , the film stars Jon Hamm as a former U.S. diplomat who returns to service in the titular city of Beirut in order to save a colleague from the group responsible for the death of his family .
Rosamund Pike , Dean Norris , Shea Whigham , Larry Pine and Mark Pellegrino also star .
Principal photography began in Morocco in June 2016 .
The film premiered on January 22 , 2018 , at the Sundance Film Festival and was released in the United States on April 11 , 2018 .
It received generally positive reviews from critics , who called it " absorbing despite its flaws " and praised Hamm 's and Pike 's performances .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1972 , Mason Skiles is a U.S. diplomat in Lebanon living in Beirut with his Lebanese wife , Nadia .
They have recently begun caring for Karim , a 13-year - old Palestinian boy who claims he is without a family .
While hosting a party , Skiles is confronted by his friend , CIA officer Cal Riley , who wishes to question Karim , whose brother has been linked to the 1972 Munich massacre .
The party is attacked by Karim 's brother , Rami , who abducts Karim ; in the ensuing gunfight , Nadia is killed .
Ten years later , Skiles has become an alcoholic and is working as a self - employed labor arbitrator in New England .
While arbitrating a labor issue between particularly intransigent parties and struggling to keep his small firm afloat , he is approached by Sully , an old client , on behalf of the U.S. government .
Sully discloses that Skiles has been requested for an academic lecture in Lebanon , and hands him money , a plane ticket , and a passport .
Skiles is initially resistant but decides to travel to Beirut .
He meets several government officials , including Donald Gaines , Colonel Gary Ruzak , and Ambassador Frank Whalen , along with CIA officer Sandy Crowder , and learns that Cal Riley was recently abducted in Lebanon .
The kidnappers have specifically requested Skiles as the negotiator .
The group meets with the kidnappers and find Karim heading the organization .
Karim demands the release of his brother in exchange for Riley , despite the Americans ' protest that they do not have Rafid in captivity .
Skiles suspects that Israel is holding Rafid , and travels with Ruzak to secure his release .
The Israelis reveal that they do not have Rafid , and Skiles returns to Beirut to meet with Alice , Riley 's wife .
Alice holds Skiles responsible for Riley 's abduction , believing that Riley has remained in Lebanon over the guilt he feels for Nadia 's death .
The next day , while Skiles is conducting the lecture at the American University of Beirut ( the official reason for his visit ) , a car bomb is set off outside the building .
In the ensuing chaos , Skiles is instructed to leave to meet Karim .
Karim brings him to Riley , who covertly tells Skiles that the Palestine Liberation Organization ( PLO ) is holding Rafid and that Gaines is not to be trusted .
Before releasing Skiles , Karim threatens that unless Rafid is returned later that night , he will sell Riley to Iran .
Skiles returns to Riley 's apartment to search for clues , where he encounters Crowder .
She reveals that Gaines had been stealing money from the embassy and that Riley had been preparing to make a report shortly before his disappearance .
Skiles convinces Crowder that the PLO is holding Rafid , and she steals $ 4 million from the CIA office to trade for Rafid .
After Skiles attacks a PLO officer , he sets up a trade for Rafid and brings him to the exchange with Karim .
After trading Riley for Rafid , Rafid is shot and killed by a Mossad sniper in a nearby building .
The Americans successfully escape .
The Mossad sniper is actually Bernard who originally met Skiles when he arrived to Beirut .
Bernard meets Sandrine , the mistress of the PLO officer whom Skiles attacked , who is also an Israeli agent , and leaves on a helicopter .
Before departing Beirut , Skiles learns that Gaines has unexpectedly retired and that Ruzak has left Beirut .
Crowder announces her intention to apply for the newly vacant jobs , and Skiles offers his services as a negotiator .
As the film ends , news footage is shown of the subsequent Israeli invasion of Lebanon , increasing international involvement in the country , and , finally , the bombings of the U.S. Embassy and the U.S. Marine Corps ' barracks in Beirut in 1983 .
CAST
* Jon Hamm as Mason Skiles , a former U.S. diplomat who returns to service to save a former colleague .
* Rosamund Pike as Sandy Crowder , a CIA field officer working undercover at the American embassy tasked with keeping Mason alive and ensuring the mission is successful .
* Dean Norris as Donald Gaines , CIA * Shea Whigham as Gary Ruzak , Colonel , National Security Council * Larry Pine as Frank Whalen , U.S. Ambassador to Lebanon * Mark Pellegrino as Cal Riley , CIA , Mason 's friend * as Karim Abu Rajal * Ben Affan as Jassim / Rami * Leïla Bekhti as Nadia
* Alon Abutbul as Roni Niv
* Kate Fleetwood as Alice * Douglas Hodge as Sully * Jonny Coyne as Bernard
* Mohamed Zouaoui as Fahmi
* Mohamed Attougui as Raffik
* Neal Huff as Ernie PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In May 2015 , Deadline Hollywood reported that Jon Hamm had signed on to star .
In July 2015 , Rosamund Pike joined the cast .
In May 2016 , ShivHans Pictures came on board to produce and finance the film .
Dean Norris , Shea Whigham , Larry Pine and Mark Pellegrino joined the cast .
Filming began in Tangier , Morocco in June 2016 .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Bleecker Street acquired the U.S. distribution rights in July 2017 .
The film premiered at the 2018 Sundance Film Festival in January 2018 .
It was theatrically released in the United States on April 11 , 2018 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
, Beirut had grossed $ 5 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 1.8 million in other territories , for a total worldwide gross of $ 6.8 million .
Playing in 755 theaters , the film made $ 1.7 million in its opening weekend ( a total of $ 2 million over its first five days ) , finishing 13th at the box office .
In its second weekend , the film made $ 1.1 million ( a drop of 39 % ) and finished 17th .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 81 % based on 118 reviews , and an average rating of 6.7/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Beirut tells a complex , tightly plotted tale of international intrigue , further elevated by strong central performances from Jon Hamm and Rosamund Pike . "
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 69 out of 100 , based on 31 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Dennis Harvey of Variety called the film an " agreeably old - school form of cinematic espionage intrigue . "
John DeFore , writing for The Hollywood Reporter , characterized it as a " period political thriller whose motivations remain timely .
"
The Financial Times Damon Wise wrote that " Beirut proves surprisingly sensitive in its handling of the Middle East , mapping out an area of nuanced power struggle rather than a cartoon Casablanca - style warzone . "
Brian Tallerico of RogerEbert.com said that " this is Hamm 's best leading role to date , a reminder of how good he can be when he 's given the right material . "
TRAILER CRITICISM Section::::Trailer criticism .
The film 's trailer received criticism from social media users for dehumanizing Arabs and Muslims , having a white savior narrative , ignoring political complexities of the Lebanese Civil War , and failing to show Lebanese people as fully formed characters .
The trailer 's closing tagline of " 2,000 years of revenge , vendetta , murder ... welcome to Beirut " has been criticized as a confusing misrepresentation of the history of Beirut .
The trailer was criticized by Sopan Deb in the New York Times .
He called it offensive , portraying a stereotypical image of Lebanese , Arabs and the Middle East at large .
He points out that no Lebanese actors are featured in the film , and cites a social media hashtag , # BoycottBeirutMovie , as evidence of the trailer 's reception in Lebanon .
Walaa Chahine , writing for the Huffington Post , echoed similar criticisms , arguing that the trailer " seems to follow the same rhetoric so many other Middle East thrillers like to portray - Arabs are barbaric and uncivilized , and their countries are a mess " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS