ROMAN J. ISRAEL , ESQ .
Roman J. Israel , Esq . is a 2017 American legal drama film written and directed by Dan Gilroy .
The film stars Denzel Washington , Colin Farrell , and Carmen Ejogo , and centers on the life of an idealistic defense lawyer ( Washington ) who finds himself in a tumultuous series of events that lead to a personal crisis and the necessity for extreme action .
Roman J. Israel , Esq .
premiered at the 2017 Toronto International Film Festival on September 9 , 2017 , and began a limited release in the United States by Columbia Pictures on November 17 , 2017 .
The film went wide on November 22 , 2017 , and grossed just $ 13 million against its $ 22 million budget .
The film received mixed reviews from critics but Washington was widely praised for his performance , for which he received nominations for the Academy Award for Best Actor , the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor –
Motion Picture Drama , and the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading Role .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Roman J. Israel is a lawyer working for $ 500 a week at a small law firm in Los Angeles .
In his two - partner office , Israel is responsible for preparing briefs , often focusing on the civil rights of their defendants , while William Jackson , the firm 's owner and a well - respected professor , focuses on the courtroom appearances that Israel struggles with .
Israel has spent years developing a brief that he believes will bring social reform to the unfair use of plea - bargaining to induce guilty pleas in the justice system .
Though short on interpersonal skills , Israel is gifted with a phenomenal memory as well as strong personal convictions on the meaning of justice , which he has pursued at the expense of family .
Jackson suffers a fatal heart attack .
The firm is broke and will close , all to be handled by Jackson 's former student , George Pierce .
Pierce , who greatly admired Jackson and is impressed by Israel 's legal mind ( " worth $ 250 an hour " ) , offers a job at his own large firm .
Israel rejects this offer , believing that Pierce is simply a greedy lawyer .
Israel meets Maya during a job interview at a local activist network .
The interview does not go well , but Maya asks him to speak at an upcoming meeting organizing a protest .
Israel reluctantly takes a job with Pierce .
Israel is a poor fit , clashing with senior partner Jesse Salinas after Israel mockingly laughs at a joke Salinas makes about battered women .
After attempting to interest Pierce in his brief to change the legal system , Israel is disappointed when he is instead assigned by Pierce to handle clients .
Israel is assigned Derrell Ellerbee , a young man arrested for murder .
Ellerbee tells Israel that he is willing to tell police the whereabouts of the actual shooter , longtime criminal Carter Johnson , and will testify against him .
Israel goes behind Salinas ' back to negotiate a plea deal with the district attorney , but the prosecutor rejects his offer and hangs up on Israel after he insults her unsympathetic counter - offer to his bargain .
No deal is struck and Ellerbee is murdered as a snitch .
Israel 's mishandling of Ellerbee 's case leads to trouble for the firm and Pierce berates him for his insubordination .
That evening Israel is mugged and beaten by a homeless man he attempted to help .
Israel becomes downcast and cynical , illegally using the information he received from Ellerbee to anonymously collect the $ 100,000 reward for Johnson 's location .
Israel indulges in luxuries he had previously eschewed .
Pierce apologizes to Israel , revealing that the death of Jackson and his observations of Israel 's dedication to justice has touched him .
He reforms his firm to add a new focus on pro - bono cases , headed by Israel .
Pierce offers to work with Israel on the legal brief for plea reform , but Israel 's new materialistic outlook prevents him from enjoying the changes he has inspired .
Maya calls Israel to ask him out on a date , where she shares some of her struggles with idealism and thanks Israel for his inspiration about progressive lawyering and advocacy , but he appears unmoved .
Pierce calls Israel to meet a new client arrested for murder , who turns out to be Carter Johnson .
At the jailhouse , Johnson accuses Israel of divulging privileged communications to collect the reward .
Having accepted that he will spend the rest of his life in prison , Johnson 's only goal is to torment Israel with the threat of jail time or even death .
Israel finally suffers a breakdown and renounces his greedy , self - centered worldview .
Israel returns the reward ( with a promise to repay the $ 5,547.27 he spent ) , reconciles with Maya and Pierce and tries to motivate them to pursue their inner sense of justice .
He tells Pierce that he is turning himself in to the police for his crime , then starts walking to a nearby station , but is shot and killed by one of Johnson 's henchmen .
In the aftermath , Maya is seen to be renewed in her activism efforts , while Pierce files Israel 's massive brief in Federal Court , in both their names , intent on continuing Israel 's efforts to reform the justice system .
CAST * Denzel Washington as Roman J. Israel , Esq .
* Colin Farrell as George Pierce * Carmen Ejogo as Maya Alston * Lynda Gravatt as Vernita Wells
* Amanda Warren as Lynn Jackson ( niece ) * Hugo Armstrong as Fritz Molinar * Sam Gilroy as Connor Novick * Tony Plana as Jesse Salinas
* DeRon Horton as Derrell Ellerbee
* Amari Cheatom as Carter Johnson PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On August 25 , 2016 , it was revealed that Dan Gilroy 's next directorial project was Inner City , a legal drama in the vein of The Verdict .
Gilroy was then courting Denzel Washington to star .
It was reported on September 21 , 2016 that Sony Pictures was closing a deal to distribute the film , with principal photography scheduled to begin in March 2017 .
Gilroy 's collaborators on Nightcrawler , cinematographer Robert Elswit and editor John Gilroy , worked with him again on the project .
On January 31 , 2017 , it was reported that Colin Farrell was in talks to join the cast .
As of February 28 , 2017 , Ashton Sanders was in talks to join as well , though he was unable to because of scheduling conflicts .
In April 2017 , Nazneen Contractor and Joseph David - Jones joined the cast .
As of April 21 , 2017 , Inner City had begun filming in Los Angeles .
In June 2017 , Carmen Ejogo joined the cast as a civil rights worker .
On June 22 , 2017 , the film was renamed Roman J. Israel , Esq . RELEASE Section::::Release .
The film had its world premiere at the Toronto International Film Festival on September 10 , 2017 , before its commercial release on November 17 , 2017 , initially limited , by Columbia Pictures .
Following its festival premiere , the film was re - edited to tighten its pacing , with a dozen minutes ( including one whole subplot ) being shaved off the final runtime , and a key scene regarding Colin Farrell 's character being shifted from the third act to earlier in the film .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The film took in $ 61,999 from four theaters in its limited opening weekend , for a per - venue average of $ 15,500 .
It then expanded to 1,648 theaters the following Wednesday , alongside the openings of Coco and The Man Who Invented Christmas .
It was projected to gross around $ 4 million over its five - day weekend but ended up debuting at $ 4.5 million finishing 9th at the box office .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 51 % based on 154 reviews , with an average rating of 5.8/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads ,
" Intriguing yet heavy - handed , Roman J. Israel , Esq . makes the most of — but never quite lives up to —
Denzel Washington 's magnetic performance in the title role .
"
On Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating to reviews , the film has a weighted average score 58 out of 100 , based 41 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B " on an A+ to F scale .
Writing for Rolling Stone , Peter Travers gave the film 3 out of 4 stars , praising Washington and writing , "
In no way is his performance a stunt .
Washington digs so deep under the skin of this complex character that we almost breathe with him .
It 's a great , award - caliber performance in a movie that can barely contain it . "
Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun - Times gave the film 2 out of 4 stars .
He also highlighted Washington , but criticized the narrative , saying , " Roman J. Israel , Esq .
has pockets of intrigue , and writer - director Gilroy and Washington have teamed up to create a promising dramatic character .
We just never get full delivery on that promise . "
In his review for Empire , Simon Braund summarized the political motives in the film viewed as a legal thriller stating , "
It ( Roman 's idealism ) illustrates succinctly how at odds with the modern world Roman Israel is .
A brilliant legal mind , trapped in the body of a twitchy social misfit , he has all the hallmarks of a true genius - savant — the interpersonal skills of a yeast cell , dress sense of an Open University lecturer circa 1973 and an unshakeable conviction that justice for the poor and dispossessed is a cause worth fighting for .
To this deeply unfashionable end , he 's spent decades toiling in the shadows at a tiny law firm , making trouble for The Man while compiling a vast , unwieldy brief he hopes will , one day , set the American legal system on its ear " .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
!
scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Date of ceremony ! scope="col
" Category ! scope="col " Recipient(s ) and nominee(s ) ! scope="col " Result ! scope="col " class="unsortable " REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS