MAC N '
CHEETOS
Mac n ' Cheetos are a deep - fried cheese - flavored , puffed cornmeal and macaroni and cheese product sold by the international fast food chain store Burger King and the private restaurant chain Sheetz .
The food is a combination of macaroni and cheese with the Frito - Lay snack Cheetos .
Mac n ' Cheetos were first introduced in late June 2016 .
The product contained five pieces and initially came with ranch dressing .
Depending on supply , it was sold for an eight - week period .
Many publications have pointed out that Mac n ' Cheetos is part of a larger trend of blending fast foods with well - known snack foods , as well as reflecting the current state of fast food alliances .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 2015 , Burger King entered into a partnership with PepsiCo 's Frito - Lay , which also owns the Doritos and Ruffles brands .
Mac n ' Cheetos marked the first time the Cheetos brand extended beyond chips into hybrid foods .
On June 22 , 2016 , Burger King announced that they would begin selling the product the next week .
The product was initially test - marketed at Burger King restaurants during a product trial in Southern California .
Mac n ' Cheetos were introduced nationwide on June 27 , 2016 .
In an interview , Burger King president Alex Macedo said , " We 're partnering up with one of Americans ' favorite brands .
It 's quite unique . "
Mac n ' Cheetos , including other Burger King products like the recently introduced Oscar Mayer hot dogs , reflects the fast - food alliances restaurants have with other companies .
While PepsiCo owns Frito - Lay 's Cheetos , the American restaurants sell Coca - Cola beverages .
Despite this recent product , Macedo remarked , " It 's not a plan for us to migrate to Pepsi .
Our relationship with Coke is as good as it is with PepsiCo . "
However , Macedo has also said , " We 're working on a few other menu items .
There 's room for us to do more together in the future . "
The menu item sold out within the first few weeks .
Fried macaroni and cheese sans the Cheeto branding has been done before .
The Cheesecake Factory sold it .
Wayback Burgers , which collaborated with Burger King to produce a Peace Day burger , sold triangular pieces of fried macaroni and cheese .
Other fast food restaurants like Taco Bell have previously employed a similar strategy .
In 2010 , Kentucky Fried Chicken ( KFC ) introduced the Double Down as an April Fools ' Day joke .
In 2012 , Taco Bell , which is owned by Yum !
Brands , introduced the Doritos Locos Taco , whose taco shell is composed of the Doritos chip .
Offshoots followed as Cool Ranch , Nacho Cheese and Fiery Doritos .
Consumerists Laura Northrup compared them to 7-Eleven 's Doritos Loaded and Hostess Brands 's deep - fried Twinkies sold at participating Walmart locations .
Since June 2016 , Mac n ' Cheetos have been sold at American convenience store / gas station Sheetz stores , along with a Flamin ' Hot version .
Sheetz locations include North Carolina and Ohio .
Later , Burger King offered Cheeto Chicken Fries , based on their BK Chicken Fries .
On May 18 , 2017 , Burger King returned the Mac n ' Cheetos to its menu .
Burger King president Alex Macedo described the food item as a " triple threat , " because it combines Burger King , Cheetos , and macaroni and cheese .
In the summer of 2017 , Frito - Lay released Mac n ' Cheetos to grocery stores in response to fan interest following the popularity Burger King 's limited time releases .
In late November 2017 , it was announced that a new flavor , " Flamin ' hot Mac ' n Cheetos " , would soon be arriving at Burger King .
These are based on a spicier variant of Cheetos , and have a spicy red dusting .
PRODUCT DESCRIPTION
Section::::Product description .
Mac n ' Cheetos are fried macaroni and cheese bites shaped and colored to resemble Cheetos brand cheese curls .
The product contains five pieces and was initially served with a side of ranch dressing .
The product is contained in a portable box .
Reports varied on the food 's appearance .
Fox News described them as " bright orange " with a " pretty unusual " shape .
The Chicago Tribunes Joseph Hernandez called the color of the menu item " neon - orange " .
Consequence of Sounds Ben Kaye remarked that they were " new cat poop - shaped fried mac and Cheeto cheese curls " .
Consumerists Ashlee Kieler perceived its color as " glowing , orange - ish " .
The Verges Dami Lee commented that they were " coagulated orange clumps of processed cheese " .
Bloomberg Newss Leslie Patton said it was " portable macaroni - and - cheese bites are similar to mozzarella sticks " .
Food & Wines Mike Pomranz said " Like a car crash , this bizarre mashup is just too intense to ignore . "
The Raw Storys Brad Reed saw it as " radioactive - orange " and " Trump - colored " , but remarked " do look marginally more appetizing than the terrifying bright - red Whopper Burger King released earlier this year " .
Vices Alex Swerdloff noted the product as " a chode - like mass " and resembling " the lovechild of E.T. 's finger and a bloated corpse that was given a spray tan " .
Yahoo !
Styles Claire Lower called them " orange nuggets " .
The Denver Posts Megan McArdle reported it " bearing the same resemblance to real food as a plastic Lego tree does to a stately elm " .
The Guardians Joshua David Stein said the Cheetos crust was " bright orange " .
The Capital Timess Rob Thomas said they were " five stubby cylinders that look like mozzarella sticks , dusted heavily with orange Cheeto dust " .
Business Insider performed a blind taste test for Mac n ' Cheetos .
About half of the testers were repulsed by the product .
Fox News Channel 's Chew
On This enacted a blind taste test for Mac n ' Cheetos in the streets of New York City .
Reception proved positive .
In the web series Juggalos Review Foods , two Insane Clown Posse fans ( or Juggalos ) tried the Mac n ' Cheetos with a more mixed reception .
One of the hosts appraised the food product with " this tastes like processed weird gross mac and cheese - like gimmicky piece of crap food item from Burger King " .
USA Todays Ted Berg said " they 're not good " but also " not totally awful " either .
Kotakus Mike Fahey said " pleased to report that Mac n ' Cheetos taste much better than they look " but also that they do not taste like the cheese puff but rather like the Kellogg 's cracker Cheez - It .
Chicago Tribunes Joseph Hernandez described the meal as " gritty , fried nugget of Easy Mac , rolled in the remains of the bottom of a bag of Cheetos " .
Yahoo !
Styles Claire Lower said " I liked them
but , maybe this is because my standards for stunt food are much too high , I did n't love them .
"
The Capital Timess Rob Thomas reviewed the interior of the Mac n ' Cheetos favorably stating " does indeed have the satisfying cheesy blandness of a container of quick - zapped microwave Easy Mac , salty and starchy " .
However , Thomas was critical of how it did not taste like Cheetos saying " [ i]t 's very disappointing " .
When the menu item was brought back in October 2016 by Sheetz , Consumerists Laura Northrup described them as " orange breaded carbohydrate globs . "
Fortunes Michal Addady called it " essentially fried mac and cheese coated with flavoring from Cheetos , a PepsiCo brand .
"
Bustles Claire Warner described Mac n ' Cheetos returning via Sheetz as " the Internet basically threw a party . "
When the food item returned to the Burger King menu in May 18 , 2017 , Eater.coms Amanda Kludt described it as " novelty dish and millennial - bait . "
Brit + Cos Maggie McCracken ranked Mac n ' Cheetos # 1 on the list " 10 Most Popular Mac and Cheese
# Cheatday Meals on Instagram " with " a WHOPping ( get it ? )
" 35,000 likes on Instagram .
Bustles Claire Warner said " it sounds like what happens when you accidentally drop a glob of macaroni and cheese into a half - consumed bag of Cheetos resting on your lap , and
a few hours later , you decide to eat said glob because it 's 2 a.m.
and nobody 's watching .
You already know if this is something you 're into . "
NUTRITION Section::::Nutrition .
One serving of Mac n ' Cheetos contains 310 calories .
YouTube user PopSugar provided a recipe for homemade Mac n ' Cheetos .
PRICE Section::::Price .
Mac n ' Cheetos contains five pieces and was originally priced in Burger King at about $ 2.50 In New York City , the total cost including New York state sales tax is $ 3.26 .
USA Todays Ted Berg was critical of the price choice , as he thought it would be 99¢ at Taco Bell .
When the food item was brought back in October 2016 at Sheetz , it was priced at $ 2.99 .
Sheetz offers it available for pickup via the Sheetz Apps menu .
However , it costs $ 3.49 in Altoona , Pennsylvania .
In May 2017 , the Mac n ' Cheetos was priced $ 2.69 at Burger King .
ADVERTISING
Section::::Advertising .
Burger King called its product a " dangerously cheesy re - imagination " .
In May 2017 , a press release described them as " cheesiest , most amplified version of mac n ' cheese imaginable . "
In June 2016 , a commercial featuring Chester Cheetah unboxing the Mac n ' Cheetos debuted .
In May 2017 , David Miami created a music video starring The Burger King and Chester Cheetah dancing to the Mark Morrison R&B song " Return of the Mack " , remade as " Return of the Mac n ' Cheetos " .
SEE ALSO
* Burger King products REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS