DIL SE
DIL
TAK Dil Se Dil Tak ( English : From Heart To Heart ) is an Indian Hindi - language television drama that aired on Colors TV .
Its premise is based on the 2001 Bollywood film Chori Chori Chupke Chupke .
SUMMARY Section::::Summary .
The story initially focussed on the lives of Parth ( Siddharth Shukla ) and Shorvori ( Rashami Desai ) , a happily married couple , which changes after the entry of Teni ( Jasmin Bhasin ) , a young bubbly girl , who decides to become a surrogate mother to their child .
The Story later dealt with the Love Triangle of Parth ( Rohan Gandotra ) , Teni ( Jasmin Bhasin ) and Iqbal ( Mohammed Iqbal Khan ) .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Parth Bhanushali ( Siddharth Shukla ) , the grandson and heir to the conservative and affluent Bhanushali family falls in love with their employee , the Bengal - based beautiful Shorvori ( Rashami Desai ) , and marries her , despite rejection by and subsequent separation from their family .
Two years later , Shorvori gets pregnant and is accepted by Parth 's family .
However , an unfortunate accident results in a miscarriage , rendering Shorvori infertile .
Parth and Shorvori keep the miscarriage hidden from the family , not wanting to ruin their happiness and contentment .
Then enters their lives , Teni ( Jasmin Bhasin ) , a carefree - outgoing - lively - bubbly Gujarati girl whom Parth and Shorvori select for surrogacy , in return of their promise to fulfill Teni 's dream of going to America .
Teni gets pregnant with Parth and Shorvori 's child through IVF .
Shorvori introduces Teni as her cousin to the family as she begins to live in Bhanushali house .
Parth 's aunt Poyni ( Urvashi Upadhyay ) with her daughter Sejal ( Himani Sharma ) doubt that Teni is hiding something and to be not related to Shorvori , given her ways and Gujarati dialect .
Sejal tries to defame Teni in front of the family but in vain .
Later , the family arranges for Teni 's engagement , but she manages to call it off , proclaiming that she is already in a relationship with Parth 's friend , Aman ( Kunal Verma ) .
Aman comes from the US on Dadaji 's ( Tej Sapru ) insistence to get the situation clear but ends up falling in love with Teni at first sight and proposes marriage to Teni .
Teni agrees , to fulfill her desire to get settled in America and live a financially secure life with her lover , Aman .
Parth 's family conducts a ritual for his and Shorvori 's prospective child 's welfare but on Shorvori 's insistence , Teni sits in the puja with Parth as she is bearing the child .
Teni wavers in her decision to marry Aman as she starts falling in love with Parth , the love that she realises as her impending marriage with Aman approaches , but decides to marry Aman for his , Parth and Shovori 's sake .
Teni however ends up confessing her feelings to Parth as he contemplates revealing everything to Shorvori .
Meanwhile , Bhanushali family is in turmoil following the revelations regarding Teni 's pregnancy as Parth accepts the baby to be his !
Aman is even forced to break all ties with her and he walks out of her life .
But when Shorvori come to Parth and Teni 's defense , Dadaji comes to the shocking decision of banishing the trio from the family .
But on getting to know of the surrogacy truth , the family eventually forgives Parth , Shorvori and Teni as they are again welcomed in the Bhanushali family .
Parth - Shorvori along with the entire Bhanushali family redouble their efforts to take care of Teni and the perspective child .
However , Indu ( Vaishnavi Mahant ) , Parth 's mother , starts criticizing Shorvori , for lying about her pregnancy to the family .
Shorvori feels distressed and goes on to misunderstand Parth 's growing relationship with Teni upon noticing Parth and Teni in few random situations .
Shorvori makes a stern request , following which Parth stays away from Teni and even refuses to talk to her .
Now with the two people closest to her acting distant and aloof , Teni feels neglected and interacts with Parth ragarding the matter as Shorvori walks in and spotting them together , she lashes out at Parth for breaking his promise and accuses him of cheating on her and takes the drastic decision of leaving the house , ending her relationship with Parth .
Later , Teni gets to know that Shorvori has brain tumour and is going to die soon .
She just pretended as if she misunderstood Parth and Teni to earn their hatred .
She forbids Teni from informing Parth about her condition and wants Teni to be the woman for Parth after her death .
Shorvori continues her drama to make Parth and family members hate her , but in vain .
Teni decides to help her out in her drama as finally , Shorvori sends divorce papers to Parth and even gets him arrested for one night .
The family turns against Shorvori as they now believe that Parth should forget Shorvori and marry Teni instead .
The entire family supports Teni when she decides to leave the house with the unborn child as Parth had declined her marriage proposal .
Parth begins to suspect Shorvori 's true intentions and asks Teni to make Shorvori sign the divorce papers in his presence as a condition for marrying Teni .
Shorvori calls Teni talk in private , but meets with an accident as her car 's brakes fail and it crashes into a tree .
Teni witnesses the accident but fails to rescue Shorvori as the car goes up in flames , killing Shorvori !
Teni informs Parth and the family that Shorvori is dead , much to their shock .
Parth disbelieves her , but is heartbroken on seeing the dead body in the hospital .
While the family members lament Shorvori 's death , Parth struggles to cope with the pain of losing her .
Teni , following Shorvori 's wish , together with the family , finally convinces Parth to move on for the sake of his and Shorvori 's unborn child , however , refuses to marry Teni .
On seeing the accident video of Shorvori on Teni 's phone , Parth accuses her of murdering Shorvori and tries to get her arrested , without listening Teni 's explanation .
But Dadaji takes Teni 's side and saves her .
Thereafter , Teni , following another heated argument with Parth , has labour pain as in just 7 months , she gives birth to a baby girl ( whom Teni later names the baby as Ipshita , as per late Shorvori 's wish , from Parth 's ' P',Shorvori 's 'S ' and Teni 's ' T ' ) .
After her delivery , Teni 's life is at stake , but Parth donates blood to her , saving her life ; and in return , Teni , following Parth 's demand , leaves the house and again settles in her colony , where she starts her catering business .
Meanwhile , Parth 's sister , Jagruti 's ( Gouri Agarwal ) ex - fiancée , Rishabh ( Mayank Arora ) for taking his revenge from Parth ( Rohan Gandotra replaced the Siddharth Shukla ) to expose his true intention to be grabbing Bhanushali 's wealth by marrying Jagruti , kidnaps the baby - Ipshita from the naming ceremony in disguise .
Parth suspects Teni to be behind Ipshita 's kidnapping , but along with Teni , soon behinds out Risabh to be the one responsible .
Parth and Teni track him down and beat him up , however , he tells them that he sold Ipshita to Madamji ( Kanika Maheshwari ) , a vicious trafficker , whom Teni knows as she used to work for her .
Teni attempts to rescue Ipshita by rejoining Madamji 's dance bar , after being forgiven by her and looks for Ipshita there and finally finds her .
However , she has to get back to her dance performance , as Parth comes and is locked up by Madamji 's goons .
Teni turns off the lights and together with Parth and Ipshita runs away , rescuing them .
Madam ji gets mad at Teni for lying to her and goes after them with her goons but Parth manages to get them arrested , with their crimes being recorded in his spy pen .
Madamji , however , shoots Parth in the arm as he then finally realizes that Teni can never kill Shorvori and brings her back home , after apologizing to her .
Teni forgives him and leaves for her colony .
Parth feels heartbroken at Teni 's departure and realizes that he is in love with Teni but is scared if it will affect their friendship .
On new year 's occasion , Parth becomes Teni 's partner in a couple dance performance in a competition held in Teni 's colony and they win .
Teni decides to go to America and asks Parth to come to help her get her visa .
Parth becomes very sad and finally confesses his love for Teni and proposes her to marry him which she happily accepts .
The whole family prepares for their wedding as per ritual .
It is now revealed that Shorvori is alive and had been in coma for 3 months .
She returns to the house to reclaim Parth on the day of his wedding with Teni , but gets emotional on seeing Parth marrying Teni and leaves the venue .
A stranger offers to drop her , but is drunk and starts misbehaving with her after she gets in the car .
This incident is recorded in a CCTV camera and is shown in the news .
Parth and Teni , on seeing this , decide to go to Nainital where they get to know
Shorvori might be staying .
In Nainital , Shorvori gets the job of a music teacher .
Parth and Teni try to find her there but in vain .
Shorvori however spots them and hides , wanting Parth to be together with Teni , who sacrificed her entire life for him .
Teni , on the other hand , starts thinking that Parth and Shorvori are meant to be with each other and decides to reunite them .
Parth then concludes that he was imagining Shorvori all this while and says sorry to Teni because he troubled her so much and extended their stay to spend time with her .
Parth consummates his marriage with Teni , declaring their love .
The next day they finally come across Shorvori in a local temple coincidentally .
But , Shorvori lies about her identity and tries to avoid them .
A determined Parth then dares her to swear on his name and accept her true identity .
Parth then binds both the wedding bands and decides that whosoever will untie first , Parth will live with her .
Teni prays for Shorvori 's band to open first .
Both of the bands break and fall on the ground .
Parth , Teni , Shorvori and Ipshita arrive home and the family is surprised to see Shorvori .
Parth tells Teni to take Shorvori to the room .
Teni takes her to Parth 's and her room .
There Shorvori sees pictures of Teni and Parth .
She tells Teni that she will stay in the room where Teni used to stay .
Teni hires a lawyer .
She wants Parth and Shorvori to live together .
Teni wanted a check of 5 crore rupees to leave the house .
Parth tells Teni to take Ipshita with her because she is filthy like her mother .
Everyone gets shocked and Teni slaps Parth really hard .
Parth tells the lawyer that this was the family 's business and they will handle it themselves and the lawyer leaves .
Then Parth rips the contract paper in front of Teni 's face .
Parth then tells both Teni and Shorvori that if they ever thought how he felt .
Shorvori and Teni decided that they both will be Parth 's wives .
After they tell the family about the decision the trio made .
Dada ji said that for one month Teni will live as Parth 's wife and Shorvori will live as Ipshita 's mother .
Dada ji then accepts the relation of Parth , Teni and Shorvori .
Next day , Priya sends a court notice to the Bhanushalis and says that they can not have this relation according to law and if it is right then she also want the same .
She comes with women to protest against it outside their house .
After seeing all this both Teni and Shorvori decide to take a decision so that all others can live happily .
Days later they decide that both of them will right their name on the slip .
Dada ji will take out a slip and the persons name written on the slip will stay and other one will go .
Shorvori writes her name but Teni writes Shorvori 's name .
Dada ji saw this and decide that Shorvori will stay as Parth 's wife in the house and Teni will stay as their daughter .
On the other hand , Poyni makes plan to make Shorvori 's mind against Teni by saying false and bad things about Teni and saying that she is having a bad intention and Shorvori starts believing it .
On the day of Parth 's and Shorvori 's wedding anniversary , Poyni tells Parth about Teni 's sacrifice .
Parth later meets Teni in private and they both promise they will be good friends like they were before .
Shorvori wants Parth to either choose Teni or her .
Teni hears all this and decides to leave the house .
Teni 's foot accidentally slips and Teni falls .
At the hospital Teni starts acting weird .
The doctor says that Teni is suffering from Selective Memory Loss .
Teni starts living in the Bhanushali House as Ipshita 's Caretaker .
Later , due to some misunderstandings Teni thinks that Bhanushali Family wishes to sell her and are indulged in human trafficking .
So she flees away from the Bhanushali House .
6 YEARS LATER Section::::6 years later .
The Story shows Parth 's daughter Ipshita ( Chhahat Tehwani ) who is now grown - up .
Shorvori has died and Teni is missing from last 6 years .
Every family member misses Teni and sees her resemblance in Ipshita .
Ipshita misses her mother , Parth also remembers every moment spent with his wives Shorvori and Teni because Shorvori is dead and Teni is missing .
On the other side , Teni is leading a happy life in Delhi and has become a sales manager .
She has another love interest named Iqbal ( Mohammed Iqbal Khan ) who she is about to marry .
Due to some consequences , Parth and Teni meet each other .
After meeting each other many questions arose in Teni 's mind and to known about her past she moves to Baroda .
After questioning about her past , Parth and his family told every thing to Teni about her past .
At first Teni did n't believe them but somehow they managed to bring back her memories though Teni keeps acting like she does n't remember anything from her past until Parth sees her in Ipshita 's room and makes her confess that her memories are back .
On the day of Teni and Iqbal 's nikah , Parth asks Teni if she can hide the truth of having her memories back from Iqbal and she says that she will manage though Iqbal hears them talking and calls off their nikah .
The family reunites , show ends at Iqbal along with his Ammi leaving the house , waving at Parth , Teni , Ipshita and Indu
and they , waving back at him .
Parth and Teni are finally reunited and they both live happily with their daughter and their family .
All has gone well at last .
CAST MAIN * Jasmin Bhasin as Teni Parth Bhanushali , Parth 's second wife and Ipshita 's surrogate mother ( 2017 - 2018 )
* Rashmi Desai as Shorvori Parth Bhanushali , Parth 's first wife and Ipshita 's mother ( dead ) ( 2017 - 2018 )
* Rohan Gandotra as Parth Bhanushali , Shorvori and Teni 's husband and Ipshita 's father
( 2017–18 ) * Chhahat Tewani as Ipshita Bhanushali , Parth & Shorvori 's daughter ( 2018 )
* Mohammed Iqbal Khan as Iqbal Khan , Teni 's Ex - fiancé ( 2018 ) RECURRING
* Tej Sapru as Purushottam Bhanushali - Parth 's Grandfather ( 2017–18 ) * Dolly Minhas as Ambika Purushottam Bhanushali - Parth 's Grandmother ( 2017–18 ) * Sachin Parikh as Ramnik Purushottam Bhanushali - Parth 's Father ( 2017–18 ) * Vaishnavi Mahant as Indu Ramnik Bhanushali - Parth 's Mother ( 2017–18 ) * Urvashi Upadhyay as Poyni Bhanushali - Parth 's Maternal Aunt , Indu 's Elder Sister and Younger Sister - in - law
( 2017–18 ) * Kunal Verma as Aman Patel - Parth 's Childhood Friend & Teni 's Ex - fiancé ( 2017 )
* Khyati Keswani as Dr. Jalpa Bharat Kumar - Parth 's Paternal Aunt and Ramnik 's Younger Sister ( 2017–18 )
* Jignesh Joshi as Dr. Bharat Kumar - Parth 's Uncle and Jalpa 's Husband ( 2017–18 ) * Gouri Agarwal as Jagruti Ramnik Bhanushali - Parth 's Younger Sister ( 2017–18 ) * Karan Goddwani as Suyog Bhanushali - Parth 's Cousin Brother ( 2017 )
* Pooja Singh as Forum Suyog Bhanushali - Parth 's Sister - in - law and Suyog 's Wife ( 2017 )
* Himani Sharma as Sejal Bhanushali - Parth 's Cousin Sister ( 2017–18 ) * Mayank Arora as Rishabh - Jagruti 's Ex - fiancé ( 2017 ) * Kanika Maheshwari as Madamji - A Vicious Trafficker ( 2017 )
* Abhilash Chaudhary as Munna - Detective ( 2017 )
* Siddharth Shukla as Parth Bhanushali - Shorvari 's Husband ( Left the show ) ( 2017 )
* Puja Sharma as Priya - Bharat 's Ex - girlfriend ( 2018 )
* Abha Parmar as Ammi - Iqbal 's Mother ( 2018 )
* Zubeida Verma as Khala - Iqbal 's Maternal Aunt ( 2018 ) * Tamanna Arora as Rashida - Iqbal 's Ex - fiancée , Khala 's Daughter ( 2018 )
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The Series is produced by Shashi Sumeet Productions of Shashi Mittal and Sumeet Hukamchand Mittal .
The series was initially titled Sangharsh .
Later , Its title was changed to Dil Se Dil Tak .
THEME Section::::Theme .
The Theme of the Show is Surrogacy and Selfless Love .
AIRING Section::::Airing .
Dil Se Dil Tak premiered on 30 January 2017 and aired Monday to Friday replacing Bigg Boss 10 .
The series aired for the last time on Colors TV on 1 June 2018 .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Earlier , Mishal Raheja was finalised to play the Lead Role in the Series which was tentatively titled as Sangharsh .
He was being considered for playing the Salman Khan 's Character from the film Chori Chori Chupke Chupke on whose storyline this show is based upon .
Then , there were also rumours that Shashank Vyas will play the lead , but he took up Jaana Na Dil Se Door , whom he has signed a year before .
Later , in early September 2016 , he was replaced by Siddharth Shukla to play the role .
At about the same time , Jasmin Bhasin ( last seen in Tashan - e - Ishq was finalised for the role which was played by Preity Zinta in Chori Chori Chupke Chupke .
There were rumours that Chhavi Pandey would be romancing Mishal Raheja in the Series and would play the role of Rani Mukherjee from the film Chori Chori Chupke Chupke .
There were also rumours that Ragini Nandwani would play the Female Lead in the show
but she declined it .
Sanjeeda Sheikh Tina Dutta , Kritika Kamra , Aishwarya Sakhuja and Shraddha Arya were the actresses with whom the Production was also in talks to play the role of Rani Mukherjee from the film Chori Chori Chupke Chupke on whose storyline this show is based upon .
Finally , in late September , Rashami Desai was chosen for the role from a group of talented actresses , like Chhavi Pandey , Tina Dutta , Aishwarya Sakhuja , Kritika Kamra , Sanjeeda Sheikh and Shraddha Arya , who were short - listed for the role .
Later , the Show 's title was changed to Dil Se Dil Tak .
Thus , Finally , Rashami Desai , Siddharth Shukla and Jasmin Bhasin were finalised to play the Lead Roles in Dil Se Dil Tak .
In March 2017 , Manish Raisinghan auditioned for the role played by Siddharth Shukla in the Show but later Siddharth Shukla decided not to walk out of the Show .
After few months , Rashami Desai 's Character was shown to have been killed in a car accident when she decided to walk out of the Show .
Later , in December 2017 , Siddharth Shukla finally left the Show and was replaced by Rohan Gandotra .
In January 2018 , Rashami Desai made a comeback in the Series but finally left the Series in March 2018 when her character was shown to have died in the show .
Mohammed Iqbal Khan has most recently entered the Series to play the Lead Role along with Rohan and Jasmin .
It then starred Rohan Gandotra , Jasmin Bhasin and Mohammed Iqbal Khan in the Lead Role .
POPULARITY AND TRPS Section::::Popularity and TRPs .
The series gained early popularity because of Siddharth Shukla and Rashami Desai 's onscreen chemistry .
The series ' target rating points ( TRPs ) declined after the actors left the show , and the series ended on 1 June 2018 .
The series was replaced by the Colors TV drama Silsila Badalte Rishton Ka from 4 June 2018 .
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
This show is also dubbed in Tamil as Ennarugil Nee Irundhaal and airs on Polimer TV .
Since August 2017 , the show is also running on Pakistani Channel Filmazia with the same title .
The series is also voiced in Indonesian as Dil Se Dil Tak which is currently aired on ANTV since 12 March 2018 to 16 May 2018 .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website
* Dil - Se Dil Tak on Colors TV