DIRK GENTLY 'S HOLISTIC DETECTIVE AGENCY ( TV SERIES )
Dirk Gently 's Holistic Detective Agency is a BBC America comic science fiction detective television series created and primarily written by Max Landis .
The two seasons are inspired by the novel series of the same name by Douglas Adams .
The series is co - produced and distributed by BBC America and Netflix , along with AMC Studios , Ideate Media and IDW Entertainment .
Filming primarily took place in Vancouver , British Columbia .
The series features an ensemble cast , including Samuel Barnett as the " holistic detective " Dirk Gently , and Elijah Wood as his reluctant sidekick Todd .
Other main cast members include Hannah Marks as Todd 's sister Amanda , Jade Eshete as security officer Farah Black , Fiona Dourif as " holistic assassin " Bart , and Mpho Koaho as computer technician Ken .
The first season is set in Seattle , Washington whilst the second season is set in the fictional town of Bergsberg , Montana .
The eight - episode first season premiered on BBC America on October 22 , 2016 , to positive reviews , before concluding on December 10 , 2016 .
All episodes were made available on Netflix ( outside of the United States ) on December 11 , 2016 .
On November 21 , 2016 , BBC America renewed the series for a 10-episode second season which premiered on 14 October 2017 .
Following the broadcast of the second season finale , BBC America announced the show 's cancellation .
The decision to cancel the series sparked outrage among fans of the show , and a petition was started to renew the series .
The petition has received over 130,000 signatures .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
The show is based around the eccentric Dirk Gently ( Samuel Barnett ) who claims to be a " holistic detective " , investigating obscure cases based on the inter - connectivity of all things .
During the first season he befriends Todd Brotzman ( Elijah Wood ) and Farah Black ( Jade Eshete ) who help him with his cases .
Dirk 's past is linked with " Project Blackwing " , a secret CIA project to evaluate subjects with strange abilities .
Dirk is not only followed by agents of Blackwing trying to recapture him but also by Bart Curlish ( Fiona Dourif ) , another Blackwing subject who considers herself a " holistic assassin " and believes she is destined to kill Dirk .
CAST
* Samuel Barnett as Dirk
Gently , an eccentric " holistic " detective , who understands everything in the universe to be interconnected .
He does not solve cases by conventional means , but rather by following fate .
It is revealed that he was part of a government organization studying people with ' special ' abilities , as he is mildly psychic .
He carries himself as excitable and optimistic , as a mask over his own loneliness and insecurity .
* Elijah Wood as Todd Brotzman , Dirk 's reluctant sidekick / assistant .
A bellhop who spends all of his money to help his sister Amanda afford her treatment for pararibulitis , a disease he claims to have been cured of .
It is later revealed he lied about ever having it , and lived a pattern of deceit and theft .
He now attempts to alleviate his guilt by taking care of his sister .
At the end of season 1 , he becomes afflicted by pararibulitis .
* Hannah Marks as Amanda Brotzman , Todd 's sister who suffers from pararibulitis , a hereditary disease invented for the show that causes her to suffer vivid and painful hallucinations .
Amanda later joins the Rowdy 3 , who help her manage her hallucinations .
*
Jade Eshete as Farah Black , an efficient and tough security officer with OCD .
After her millionaire boss is killed and his daughter kidnapped , Farah is determined to solve the case alongside Dirk and Todd .
She makes every attempt to keep the group safe , even if she herself is n't so sure she 's capable of doing so .
* Fiona Dourif as Bart Curlish , a " holistic " assassin who feels that the universe leads her to people she has to kill .
She claims that the universe wo n't allow her to die .
She feels that she must kill Dirk , despite not knowing who he is .
She and Dirk are intended to be as mirrors of each other , even though they have never met , either saying or hearing similar lines of dialogue in their respective lives .
Despite her grisly life and jaded views of death , Bart is in many ways innocent and childlike .
* Mpho Koaho as Ken , an electronics expert who Bart kidnaps and forces to travel with her .
While most of his recent work has been criminal in nature , he admits it is just due to his desperation for a paycheck , and is afraid of any excitement .
In season 2 , he becomes a Blackwing supervisor .
* Michael Eklund as Martin , the leader of a hedonist group called the Rowdy 3 .
Notably , the Rowdy 3 is first introduced as a group of four ( In season 2 , it is revealed that they were initially only a group of three ) .
At the end of season 1 , Amanda has joined their ranks , making them a group of five .
The Rowdy 3 are some of the people studied by the government organization tracking Dirk .
They were originally classified as vampires , as they live by eating people 's emotional energy .
At the end of season 2 , The Rowdy 3 gain yet another member , The Beast , turning them into a group of six .
* Dustin Milligan as Sgt .
Hugo Friedkin , a dimwitted government agent tracking Dirk .
* Osric Chau as Vogel ( season 2 ; recurring season 1 ) , the youngest member of the Rowdy 3 . RECURRING Section::::Cast .
Section::::Recurring .
Introduced in Season 1 * Neil Brown Jr. as Det .
Estevez , a missing persons detective , and Zimmerfield 's partner .
* Richard Schiff as Det .
Zimmerfield , a missing persons detective , and Estevez 's partner .
* Miguel Sandoval as Col . Scott Riggins , a government agent and Sgt .
Friedkin 's commanding officer .
* David Lewis as Agent Weedle , an FBI agent at odds with detectives Estevez and Zimmerfield * Viv Leacock as Gripps , a member of the Rowdy 3 .
* Zak Santiago as Cross , a member of the Rowdy 3 .
* Aaron Douglas as Gordon Rimmer , the main antagonist of Season 1 ; a desperate man obsessed with gaining power , prolonging his life , and retrieving his dog .
* Michael Adamthwaite as Zed , a key member of the Men of the Machine .
* Christian Bako as Ed , a key member of the Men of the Machine .
* Alison Thornton as Lydia Spring , a missing heiress and daughter of the murdered Patrick Spring .
* Julian McMahon as Patrick Spring / Edgar Spring / Zackariah Webb , a murdered millionaire and father of Lydia Spring .
He is revealed to be an inventor , originally from the 1800s , who had accidentally discovered time travel through his experiments with electricity .
* Mackenzie Gray as Lux Dujour , a disappeared rock star .
Introduced in Season 2 * Alan Tudyk as Mr. Priest , a ruthless , dangerous , and violent bounty hunter working for Blackwing .
* John Hannah as The Mage , a powerful wizard who takes great pleasure in his evildoings , he seeks to conquer a world not his own .
* Tyler Labine as Sherlock Hobbs , an under - stimulated , but overly enthusiastic small town sheriff who is eager to help Dirk and crew solve a new mystery .
* Izzie Steele as Tina Tevetino , Hobbs ' deputy who is extremely laid back about life and the law and is glad that Dirk and his friends ' new mystery is bringing much - needed excitement to her currently - boring everyday life .
* Amanda Walsh as Suzie Boreton , an unassuming , insecure , depressed mother .
She later becomes a powerful witch and tries to conquer Wendimoor .
* John Stewart as Bob Boreton , Suzie 's workaday husband , a motel maintenance worker .
* Jared Ager - Foster as Scott Boreton , Bob and Suzie 's delinquent son .
* Christopher Russell as Panto Trost , the eldest Trost son , he leaves Wendimoor in search of Dirk and forges an unlikely friendship with Bart .
* Lee Majdoub as Silas Dengdamor , the eldest Dengdamor son and Panto 's lover .
* Ajay Friese as Farson Dengdamor , Silas ' younger brother , his disappearance has brewed conflict between the Trosts and the Dengdamors .
* Aleks Paunovic as Wygar Oak , an imposing warrior and enforcer for the Dengdamor family .
* Emily Tennant as The Beast , a rainbow - haired creature from Wendimoor who becomes infatuated with Dirk .
She later joins Amanda and the Rowdy 3 .
* Alexia Fast as Mona Wilder , a.k.a .
" Project Lamia " , a shapeshifter and self - described " holistic actress " .
She is a Blackwing test subject and close friend of Dirk , who has accompanied him since before the Spring case , having taken the form of his " Panic Pete " stress toy .
EPISODES
SEASON 1
( 2016 )
Section::::Episodes .
Section::::Season 1 ( 2016 ) .
Bellboy Todd Brotzman , while tasked to check in on the hotel 's penthouse suite , is disturbed when he sees himself talking to an unknown person when the elevator briefly stops on one of the hotel 's floors .
When he reaches the penthouse , he is shocked to discover that its guest , the wealthy Patrick Spring , and other unknown men have been brutally murdered , seemingly by a large animal based on the damage to the room .
Todd becomes a person of interest in the investigation when he is later met by
Dirk Gently , who forcefully injects himself into Todd 's life .
Dirk claims to be a " holistic detective " and that he was hired by Patrick to investigate his murder , and drags Todd into being his assistant in his investigation .
Along the way , they are joined by Farah Black , Patrick 's bodyguard who had been taken captive during Patrick 's murder while she was trying to find Patrick 's missing daughter , Lydia .
Their investigation revolves around a machine created by 19th century inventor Zachariah Webb .
Zachariah 's invention enables the souls of two bodies to be swapped , and can allow one to travel through time .
However , one of Zachariah 's tests resulted in the machine falling forward in time to the 1960s , where it was found by a group of hippies .
Initially using the soul - swapping to create trans - extensional experiences with zoo animals , the hippies start using the machine to transfer souls with influential people , gaining wealth and power , and becoming the cult " Men of the Machine " .
In the present , this cult is led by Gordon Rimmer .
In the days prior to Patrick 's murder , Lydia Spring had figured out a connection between her family and Gordon and accosted him about it , but instead he abducted her , swapped her soul with that of a corgi , and planned to use Lydia to coerce Patrick into giving up his " other machine " .
Through clues left by Patrick , who is in fact Zachariah Webb travelling in time , Dirk and Todd find the machine and escape from Gordon by travelling back in time to just before Patrick 's murder .
They encounter a figure in clockwork armor , who is revealed to be another version of Patrick , from 2001 , who traveled forward in time to recover his initial machine from the Men of the Machine ; they , however , go separate ways , hoping to stop Gordon .
At the penthouse the Patrick in the clockwork armor disrupts the meeting : a cat , whose soul had been transferred with that of a shark , gets loose , and the shark 's soul psycho - kinetically attacks everyone present , killing the present Patrick and some of Gordon 's cult .
As Dirk , Todd , and the armored Patrick flee the hotel , Todd recognizes the conversation he had seen himself in previously .
Later they encounter an earlier version of Dirk , and the present version provides his earlier self with cryptic clues to direct him to meet with Todd and solve the case .
Now aware that he will be killed in the future and of Lydia 's plight , Patrick returns to 2001 to bury the machine for Dirk and Todd to find , and set up events so that he can assure Dirk will take Patrick 's case and save Lydia .
With help of Farah , Todd 's sister Amanda ( who suffers from " pararibulitis " , a nerve disorder that creates painful hallucinations ) , Bart Curlish ( a " holistic assassin " who believes she must kill Dirk ) and her companion Ken , and the " Rowdy 3 " ( a band of four violent punks that feed off psychic energy ) , Dirk and Todd are able to stop Gordon and the Men of the Machine from using Zachariah 's device further , leading to the cult members ' deaths , while returning Lydia to her body before they return the repaired machine to Zachariah Webb in the 19th century .
Dirk sets up his " Holistic Detective Agency " with Todd and Farah .
As the last episode closes , government agents working for the secret Blackwing project , of which Dirk and several others were once a part , converge on and capture Dirk , Bart , and Ken , and are closing in on Amanda and the Rowdy 3 .
Meanwhile , Todd , who had faked having pararibulitis for several years as to be sympathetic for Amanda , suddenly finds himself having a real incident of pararibulitis .
SEASON 2
( 2017 )
Section::::Season 2 ( 2017 ) .
Todd and Farah , on the run from the FBI , end up in the rural town of Bergsberg , Montana while searching for Dirk , who has been captured by Project Blackwing , a secret government organization studying people with strange talents .
Blackwing has also captured three of the Rowdy 3 , with Amanda and Vogel searching for them , and Ken , whom Bart is along searching for .
Dirk meets some of the other subjects in Blackwing , including " Project Moloch " , a man that has been in a coma for years , and Mona Wilder , a " holistic actress " with shapeshifting abilities .
Mona tells Dirk to " find the boy " and teleports him to Bergsberg , where he reunites with his friends .
Sgt .
Friedkin , currently in charge of Blackwing , gets Ken 's help to review old files related to Blackwing and Bergsberg , but Ken uses the opportunity to usurp power from the dimwitted Friedkin .
Dirk , Todd , and Farah befriend Sheriff Sherlock Hobbs and Deputy Tina Tevetino , and learn that the town had an unusual electrical surge in 1967 , which caused the disappearance of Hector and Marina Cardenas , along with their son Arnold .
Dirk suspects this is the boy he must find .
They meet Panto Trost , a man who claims to have come from the world of Wendimoor , a fantasy land , and who is seeking a man named " Dirk Gently " who will find the boy to help fulfill a prophecy to save the warring families of Wendimoor from an evil Mage and his newly found apprentice .
While they investigate , the Mage has arrived in Bergsberg and his apprentice 's wand has fallen into the hands of depressed soccer mom Suzie Boreton , who learns how to use it to better herself and kill those that she despises .
Dirk and his allies search the Cardenas ' home to find that it contains a fantastical pocket dimension and a portal to Wendimoor itself .
Eventually their investigation leads them to find Arnold , who had changed his identity after the 1967 event .
Arnold is prepared to tell them what happened before he is killed by the power - hungry Suzie .
While Farah , Sherlock , and Tina try to deal with the Mage , Dirk and Todd travel to Wendimoor to try to understand how it is connected to Bergsberg .
Amanda and Vogel also travel there , when Amanda 's budding psychic powers are triggered when they are cornered by Mr. Priest , a bounty hunter working for Blackwing .
While there , Amanda meets the forest witch Wakti Wapnasi , who had given Panto the prophecy , and is trained by Wakti to locate and bring the other Rowdy 3 to Wendimoor , helping to fend off forces loyal to the Mage .
Dirk concludes that Wendimoor was created by Moloch , back in 1967 .
Prior , the Cardenas had found Moloch as an infant on a boat that mysteriously appeared in Bergsberg in the 1950s , but soon learned that he had the ability to alter reality while dreaming .
That caused them to be put under investigation by Blackwing 's predecessor .
The stress of this led to Marina considering selling the farm to the Kellum corporation , but Hector refused , and in a struggle Marina accidentally stabbed and killed Hector in front of Arnold and the boy .
The boy fainted , his dreams leading to Hector and Marina 's disappearance .
Shortly thereafter , Arnold called Blackwing to have them pick up Moloch .
Frightened , the boy fell into a coma , and created the electrical surge , which Dirk likens to the Big Bang that created Wendimoor from the boy 's dreams .
Now , with the Mage and Suzie threatening both worlds , Moloch unconsciously seeded Dirk 's name to Wakti and Mona , leading to the present events .
Meanwhile , Suzie has entered Wendimoor , usurped the Mage 's troops , and send them to attack Dirk and his allies .
The Rowdy 3 , along with Panto and Bart , help to slow them down .
Farah , Sherlock , and Tina end up killing the Mage in Bergsberg .
Dirk returns to Blackwing with Amanda 's and Todd 's help to stop the Mage 's forces , now loyal to Suzie , from killing Moloch .
Amanda and Todd briefly find themselves in a space between the realities of Bergsberg and Wendimoor that explains Dirk 's " holistic " nature and how everything is connected .
Dirk and Mona rescue Moloch and bring him back to Wendimoor , where he returns to being a young boy .
He removes Suzie 's powers and imprisons her , and starts to restore Wendimoor to how he had crafted it , including resurrecting those killed by the Mage 's forces .
After thanking them for their help , the boy returns Dirk , Todd , Amanda , Mona and the Rowdy 3 to Bergsberg .
Amanda decides to stay with the Rowdy 3 to help watch for other people targeted by Blackwing , while Dirk , Todd , and Farah set up a permanent home for Dirk 's detective agency , unaware Mona has followed them .
Bart asked to be returned to Blackwing , but is dismayed to learn Ken has taken over as the facility 's manager and plans to leave her a prisoner to study .
Friedkin ends up in the space between realities and comes to an epiphany .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The first season received a favourable response from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes , it has a 71 % approval rating based on 28 reviews , with an average rating of 6.54/10 .
The site 's consensus reads " Odd and ambitious , Dirk Gently 's Holistic Detective Agency sometimes overdoses on pure weirdness but offers absurdist rewards to those who stick with it . "
On Metacritic , the first season has a score of 62 out of 100 based on 14 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
The second season was also received favorably .
On Rotten Tomatoes , it has a 100 % approval rating based on 7 reviews , with an average rating of 7.33/10 .
However , its viewership was down from the first season , averaging less than 250,000 views per episode compared to 287,000 per episode from Season 1 .
It is believed these numbers , which were slightly lower than fellow BBC America program Orphan Black , led the choice for the network to cancel the show .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS