DAREDEVIL ( SEASON 3 )
The third season of the American web television series Daredevil , which is based on the Marvel Comics character of the same name , follows Matt Murdock / Daredevil , a blind lawyer - by - day who fights crime at night .
When Wilson Fisk is released from prison , Murdock must decide between hiding from the world or embracing his life as a hero vigilante .
The season is set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe ( MCU ) , sharing continuity with the films and other television series of the franchise .
It is produced by Marvel Television in association with ABC Studios , with Erik Oleson serving as showrunner , and series creator Drew Goddard acting as consultant .
Charlie Cox stars as Murdock and Vincent D'Onofrio portrays Fisk , with Deborah Ann Woll , Elden Henson , and Stephen Rider also returning from previous seasons ; Joanne Whalley , Jay Ali , and Wilson Bethel join them .
Former series regular Ayelet Zurer also returns in a guest role .
The season was ordered in July 2016 , with Oleson announced as new showrunner for the season in October 2017 .
Filming began the following month and ended by June 2018 , with the season adapting elements from the " Born Again " comic storyline .
The 13-episode season was released on October 19 , 2018 .
Netflix canceled the series on November 29 , 2018 .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* Charlie Cox as Matt Murdock / Daredevil * Deborah Ann Woll as Karen Page * Elden Henson as Franklin " Foggy " Nelson * Joanne Whalley as Maggie Grace
* Jay Ali as Rahul " Ray " Nadeem * Wilson Bethel as Benjamin " Dex " Poindexter * Stephen Rider as Blake Tower * Vincent D'Onofrio as Wilson Fisk / Kingpin RECURRING
* Peter McRobbie as Paul Lantom * Danny Johnson as Benjamin Donovan * Stephen Rowe as Nicholas Lee * Kate Udall as Tammy Hattley
* Sunita Deshpande as Seema Nadeem
* Noah Huq as Sami Nadeem * Geoffrey Cantor as Mitchell Ellison
* Peter Halpin as Theo Nelson * Amy Rutberg as Marci Stahl * Holly Cinnamon as Julie Barnes * Royce Johnson as Brett Mahoney
* Joe Jones as Felix Manning
* Kelly McAndrews as Mrs. Shelby Section::::Cast and characters .
Section::::Recurring .
Recurring as FBI agents are Matthew McCurdy as Wellers , Don Castro as Arinori , Scotty Crowe as Lim , Richard Prioleau as Doyle , David Anthony Buglione as Johnson , Sam Slater as O'Connor , and Andrew Sensenig as Winn .
NOTABLE GUESTS
* Matt Gerald as Melvin Potter * John Patrick Hayden as Jack Murdock * Annabella Sciorra as Rosalie Carbone * Ron Simons as Strieber * Ayelet Zurer as Vanessa Marianna - Fisk PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT
Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
At San Diego Comic - Con International 2016 , Marvel and Netflix revealed the series had been renewed for a third season , with the expectation that Doug Petrie and Marco Ramirez would return as showrunners from the second season .
In October 2017 , it was announced that Erik Oleson would replace Petrie and Ramirez as showrunner for the season .
The season had yet to be scheduled for release by the end of July 2018 , and television critics wondered whether the quality of the season was to blame on this .
Netflix VP Cindy Holland responded that the scheduling of the various Marvel Netflix series , especially the crossover miniseries
The Defenders which required cast members from all of the series to come together , was to blame for the delay , and that the company had no issue with the quality of the season ; on the contrary , Holland described the season as " fantastic " and felt it was a " real return to form " for the series .
WRITING Section::::Writing .
The ending of the miniseries The Defenders , which sees Matt Murdock waking up in a convent surrounded by nuns after being presumed dead , implied elements of the season would be inspired by the " Born Again " story arc .
Charlie Cox was excited to adapt " Born Again " , calling it " an amazing story " and that the implications of the story on the season " would be exciting " .
He cautioned , however , that it would not be a " page - for - page " adaptation , " because if you do [ that ] , then you become a foregone conclusion .
There may be elements from " Born Again " , but I 'm sure there will be elements that are unfamiliar and surprising and different in order for the show to be compelling to fans who know the comics very well .
"
Oleson crafted an original story for the season , taking " pieces of some of my favorite comic book runs , that told a larger story " .
When pitching his ideas to Marvel , Oleson expected " more pushback " from them , but said " Marvel was incredibly excited about the storyline " and gave him " complete freedom " .
Executive producer Jeph Loeb did note that despite this apparent freedom , Oleson was still required to deal with Murdock 's death in The Defenders which was part of " a fairly good idea as to what [ Marvel ] wanted to tackle in terms of story " before Oleson presented his ideas .
Oleson drew inspiration from " Born Again " and " Guardian Devil " for the tone of the season .
At the start of the season , Oleson noted that Murdock would be " broken physically , broken emotionally , and broken spiritually " , with his heightened senses failing him .
Oleson added , " He 's angry at God , he 's angry at the fact that he had risked his life to do God 's work , and he 's questioning whether or not he was a fool . "
This results in Murdock donning his original black suit , similar to the one he wore in season one , since he " goes to pretty much the darkest place you can " and is at a point , Oleson notes , "
[ w]hen he realizes that he 's incapable of being Daredevil , [ and ] he would rather just end it than go forward in his life without abilities .
" Regarding the return of Wilson Fisk / Kingpin , Oleson called him " smarter , more calculated , and more manipulative , " and felt his inclusion allowed the ability to " tell a story that 's relevant to the world around us .
I looked at the show as a way to examine how tyrants manipulate in order to push their own agenda and cause fear and distrust .
" Loeb felt the season went " back to the world of the crime story " .
Karen Page 's backstory is further explored in the season , with Woll explaining it reveals " why shooting someone [ James Wesley ] and covering it up is a bit more in her wheelhouse , " while Foggy Nelson 's family and additional backstory is also seen .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Cox , Woll , Henson , and D'Onofrio all return in the season , reprising their roles as Matt Murdock / Daredevil , Karen Page , Foggy Nelson , and Wilson Fisk / Kingpin , respectively .
Rider also returns as Blake Tower .
In November 2017 , Wilson Bethel was cast as a new series regular , Benjamin " Dex " Poindexter , and in January 2018 , Joanne Whalley was revealed to have been cast as Maggie Grace , a nun who cares deeply about Murdock 's safety , and was mentioned at the end of The Defenders .
Jay Ali was cast as Rahul " Ray " Nadeem , another FBI agent , by March .
Recurring characters in the season include Peter McRobbie as Paul Lantom , Danny Johnson as Benjamin Donovan , Geoffrey Cantor as Mitchell Ellison , Amy Rutberg as Marci Stahl , and Royce Johnson as Brett Mahoney , all of whom are reprising their roles from earlier seasons .
Other recurring characters include Stephen Rowe as Nicholas Lee , one of Fisk 's lawyers ; Kate Udall as Tammy Hattley , the Special Agent in Charge of the FBI ; Sunita Deshpande as Seema Nadeem and Noah Huq as Sami Nadeem , Ray 's wife and son , respectively ; Peter Halpin as Theo Nelson , Foggy 's brother created for the series ; Holly Cinnamon as Julie Barnes , a friend of Dex ; Joe Jones as Felix Manning , Fisk 's fixer ; Kelly McAndrews as Mrs. Shelby , Fisk 's surveillance technician ; and Matthew McCurdy , Don Castro , Scotty Crow , Richard Prioleau , David Anthony Buglione , Sam Slater , and Andrew Sensenig
as FBI agents Wellers , Arinori , Lim , Doyle , Johnson , O'Connor , and Winn , respectively .
Characters making guest appearances from other MCU media include Matt Gerald as Melvin Potter , John Patrick Hayden as Jack Murdock , Annabella Sciorra as Rosalie Carbone , following up on her character 's introduction in the second season of Luke Cage , Ron Simons as NYPD captain Strieber , following his appearance in The Defenders , and former main cast member Ayelet Zurer as Vanessa Marianna - Fisk .
DESIGN
Section::::Design .
Costume designer Liz Vastola noted Daredevil 's black suit was " purposely ripped and jagged to highlight Matt 's state of mind " throughout the season .
Vastola described Page 's wardrobe as " fucking fierce " as Page transitions into more of an investigative journalist .
Foggy Nelson 's look is a " complete 180 " from what he was wearing in season one , with the character now wearing suits made by Martin Greenfield Clothiers .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Filming for the season began on November 13 , 2017 , in New York City .
A week of filming for the season in March 2018 took place in the town of Windham , New York , with set photos revealing that the town was representing Fagan Corners , Vermont , the hometown of Karen Page in the comics .
The production paid for the renovation of a local store to portray a diner for the series , and used the town 's emergency helicopter pad .
Additional filming locations for the week included nearby ski areas and a country club .
The exterior of the Lotte New York Palace Hotel served as the building of Fisk 's penthouse while under FBI surveillance .
An abandoned prison in Staten Island was used for the riot sequence in episode four .
Filming for the season was completed by mid - June 2018 .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Composer John Paesano once again returns for the season .
A soundtrack album for the season was released digitally by Hollywood Records on October 19 , 2018 .
All music composed by John Paesano , unless otherwise noted .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The third season of Daredevil was released on October 19 , 2018 on the streaming service Netflix , worldwide , in Ultra HD 4K.
Initially thought to be releasing in 2017 , Netflix COO Ted Sarandos stated in July 2016 that the season would not debut until 2018 at the earliest , after The Defenders released on August 18 , 2017 .
Cox was hopeful the season would debut in 2018 , and in October 2017 , Marvel revealed the season was indeed expected to release in 2018 .
In mid - September 2018 , the season 's release date was revealed .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
By mid - June 2018 , discussions were underway regarding the season being promoted at San Diego Comic - Con that year .
A teaser trailer for the season was included as a post - credits scene at the end of the second season of Iron Fist .
A full trailer for the season was released on October 4 , 2018 , which also confirmed Bethel 's role as Benjamin Poindexter in the season .
Cox , Henson , Woll , D'Onofrio , Whalley , Bethel , and Ali promoted the season at New York Comic Con on October 6 , 2018 .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
The review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 93 % approval rating based on 40 reviews , with an average rating of 7.55/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " The Man with No Fear returns to top form with a third season that begins tediously slow but gradually generates comic book thrills , immeasurably helped by the welcome return of Vincent D'Onofrio 's menacing Kingpin .
" Metacritic reported a score of 71 based on 6 reviews .
NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS