WONDER ( FILM )
Wonder is a 2017 American comedy - drama film , directed by Stephen Chbosky , written by Jack Thorne , Steve Conrad , and Chbosky , based on the 2012 novel of the same name by R. J. Palacio , and starring Julia Roberts , Owen Wilson , Jacob Tremblay , Mandy Patinkin , and Daveed Diggs .
The film , which follows a boy with Treacher Collins syndrome trying to fit in , was released in the United States on November 17 , 2017 , by Lionsgate .
It received positive reviews from critics and audiences , and grossed $ 305 million worldwide on a $ 20 million budget .
At the 90th Academy Awards , the film was nominated for Best Makeup and Hairstyling .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
( Jacob Tremblay ) is a 10-year - old boy living in North River Heights in upper Manhattan , New York , with his mother Isabel ( Julia Roberts ) , father Nate ( Owen Wilson ) , older sister
Olivia " Via " ( Izabela Vidovic ) , and dog Daisy .
He has a rare medical facial deformity , which he refers to as " mandibulofacial dysostosis " , and has undergone 27 different surgeries as a result .
Auggie has been home - schooled , but as he approaches fifth grade , his parents decide to enroll him in Beecher Prep , a private school .
Before the school year begins , Auggie meets with Mr. Tushman ( Mandy Patinkin ) , the principal , who arranges a tour for him with three other students : Jack Will ( Noah Jupe ) , Julian Albans ( Bryce Gheisar ) , and Charlotte Cody ( Elle McKinnon ) .
When school starts , Auggie is initially ostracized by nearly the entire student body , but soon forms a close friendship with Jack .
For Halloween , Auggie dresses in a Ghostface mask and cloak when Daisy ruins the Boba Fett costume he was planning to wear .
He walks through school upbeat and confident due to the anonymity his costume affords him .
However , as he enters his homeroom , he overhears Jack , who does not recognize him , joining in with Julian and his friends in making fun of him behind his back .
He becomes sick , forcing his mother to abandon her mother - daughter day with Via to bring him home .
Though she is hurt , Via convinces Auggie to go trick - or - treating with her , as she has been rejected by her own former best friend Miranda ( Danielle Rose Russell ) .
Eventually , Auggie forms a new friendship with a girl named Summer ( Millie Davis ) and confides in her about his split with Jack .
Jack , puzzled by Auggie 's change in attitude toward him , asks Summer why , but she will only give him the clue " Ghost Face " .
In science class , realization dawns on him , and he resolves to partner with Auggie instead of Julian for the school science fair .
When Julian angrily confronts him in the hallway and calls Auggie a " freak " , Jack punches him and the two fight .
Jack writes a letter apologizing to Mr. Tushman for his actions , and Mr. Tushman , understanding Jack was defending his friend , suspends him for two days rather than expelling him .
Jack later apologizes to Auggie and they reconcile .
Meanwhile , Via signs up for Drama Club at her high school after meeting a boy named Justin ( Nadji Jeter ) , with whom she soon begins a romantic relationship .
Via is selected to be an understudy for Miranda in the lead role in the school 's production of Our Town , but on opening night , Miranda , whose divorced parents are not there to support her , pretends to be ill after learning Via 's family is attending .
Via takes her place and gives a moving performance that earns her a standing ovation .
Via and Miranda then reconcile .
Auggie continues to be bullied by Julian and his friends .
Finally , Auggie 's homeroom teacher , Mr. Browne ( Daveed Diggs ) , discovers the bullying , and Mr. Tushman confronts Julian and his parents ( Crystal Lowe and Steve Bacic ) with the evidence .
Julian 's parents defend his actions and assert that the students should not be exposed to Auggie , but despite their threats to pull their funding from the school , Tushman suspends Julian for two days , causing him to miss an upcoming nature retreat .
Julian is distraught when his parents then declare he will not be back the following year , and apologizes to Tushman for his actions , which Tushman accepts .
At the nature retreat , Auggie and Jack are threatened by a trio of seventh graders from another school , but Julian 's friends come to their defense .
Auggie then becomes more accepted by his classmates .
At the year - end graduation ceremony , Auggie is given the Henry Ward Beecher Medal for standing out among his classmates and receives a standing ovation .
The movie ends with everyone applauding Auggie , and Isabel commenting on him being a " wonder " .
CAST
* Jacob Tremblay as August " Auggie " Pullman , a young boy with a facial deformity * Julia Roberts as Isabel Minel - Pullman , Via and Auggie 's mother
* Owen Wilson as Nate Pullman , Via and Auggie 's father * Izabela Vidovic as Olivia " Via " Pullman , Auggie 's older sister * Maccie Margaret Chbosky as young Via
* Danielle Rose Russell as Miranda Navas , Via 's best friend * Mandy Patinkin as Mr. Tushman , the principal of Beecher Prep * Daveed Diggs as Mr. Browne , Auggie 's homeroom teacher
* Noah Jupe as Jack Will , Auggie 's best friend * Bryce Gheisar as Julian Albans , a student at Beecher Prep who bullies Auggie * Elle McKinnon as Charlotte Cody , Auggie 's classmate * Millie Davis as Summer Dawson , one of Auggie 's best friends
* Sônia Braga as Lisa " Grans " Minel , Isabel 's mother , and Via and Auggie 's grandmother * Ty Consiglio as Amos Conti , one of Julian 's friends * Kyle Harrison Breitkopf as Miles Noury , one of Julian 's friends * James A. Hughes as Henry Joplin , one of Julian 's friends * Ali Liebert as Ms. Petosa , Auggie 's science teacher * Nadji Jeter as Justin Hollander , Via 's boyfriend * Nicole Oliver as Mrs. Amanda Will , Jack 's mother * Rachel Hayward as Mrs. Navas , Miranda 's mother * Crystal Lowe as Mrs. Sarah Albans , Julian 's mother
* Steve Bacic as Mr. Julian " Juls " Albans Sr . , Julian 's father * Erika McKitrick as Ella , one of Summer and Charlotte 's friends
* Sasha Neuhaus as Maya Markowitz , one of Summer and Charlotte 's friends * Izzy Lieberman as Reid Kingsley * Hannah Hoberman as Rebecca
* William Dickinson as Eddie Johnson , a seventh grade bully from another school * Emma Tremblay as Michelle
* Lydia Jewett as Lina Annan
* Armen Bagdasrov as Danny * Kaelyn Breitkopf as Angela * Victoria V. Cruz as the Science Fair judge
* Benjamin Ratner as Mr. Davenport , the drama teacher at Via 's school * J. Douglas Stewart as Darth Sidious * Michael Alan Healy as Chewbacca PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On November 27 , 2012 , it was announced that Lionsgate was developing a feature film adaptation of R. J. Palacio 's debut novel Wonder , and were in talks with John August to write the screenplay .
Mandeville Films ' David Hoberman and Todd Lieberman produced the film .
On May 8 , 2013 , Jack Thorne was hired to adapt the novel after August had departed from the project .
In October 2014 , John Krokidas was reported to be directing the film , though in April 2015 , Paul King was hired to direct instead .
Steven Conrad was writing the script at that time .
On April 14 , 2016 , Jacob Tremblay was cast to play the lead role , Auggie Pullman , while Julia Roberts was in talks to play Auggie 's mother .
On May 5 , 2016 , Roberts ' casting was confirmed , and Stephen Chbosky was set as the film 's director .
On June 27 , 2016 , Owen Wilson joined to play Auggie 's father .
On July 11 , 2016 , newcomer Noah Jupe joined the cast as Auggie 's best friend at school , and on July 15 , 2016 , Daveed Diggs was cast as Mr. Browne , an English teacher at the school .
On August 19 , 2016 , Sônia Braga joined the cast , portraying the role of Roberts 's character 's mother .
Tremblay 's prosthetic makeup , designed and created by Arjen Tuiten , took an hour and a half to apply .
It consisted of a skull cap with prosthetic ears attached , a facial prosthetic that covered Tremblay 's face , and a wig to tie it all together .
Marcelo Zarvos composed the film 's score .
Filming took place in several locations in British Columbia , Canada , and Coney Island , NY , from July 18 to September 13 , 2016 .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Bea Miller composed a song for the film , " Brand New Eyes .
" It was released on August 3 , 2017 .
Wonder author R. J. Palacio has often credited Natalie Merchant 's song " Wonder " , from her 1995 album Tigerlily , as the inspiration for her best - selling book and at Merchant 's invitation , the song was featured on the soundtrack .
The song is played during the film 's end credits .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Lionsgate had initially scheduled Wonder to be released in the United States on April 7 , 2017 .
On February 13 , 2017 , it was announced that the release date had been pushed back to November 17 , 2017 .
Wonder had its world premiere at the Regency Village Theater in Los Angeles on November 14 , 2017 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Wonder grossed $ 132.4 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 173.2 million in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 305.6 million , against a production budget of $ 20 million .
Deadline Hollywood calculated the film made a net profit of $ 55.3 million , when factoring together all expenses and revenues .
In the United States and Canada , Wonder opened alongside Justice League and The Star , and was initially projected to gross around $ 9 million from 3,096 theaters in its first weekend .
However , after grossing $ 740,000 from Thursday night previews and receiving a large number of group ticket sales , weekend projections were upped to $ 15 million .
Weekend projections were again increased , this time to $ 28 million , after the film made $ 9.4 million on its first day .
The film went on to debut to $ 27.1 million , finishing second at the box office , behind Justice League .
In its second weekend , the film dropped just 17.7 % , grossing $ 22.7 million and finishing third at the box office .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 85 % based on 156 reviews , and an average rating of 7/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Wonder does n't shy away from its bestselling source material 's sentiment , but this well - acted and overall winsome drama earns its tugs at the heartstrings .
"
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 66 out of 100 , based on 33 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A+ " on an A+ to F scale , one of fewer than 80 films in the history of the service to receive the grade .
Some reviewers criticized the decision to cast an actor without the disease as Auggie as undermining the film 's message .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
!
scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Date of ceremony ! scope="col
" Category ! scope="col " Recipient(s ) and nominee(s ) ! scope="col " Result ! scope="col " class="unsortable
" ! scope="row " rowspan="2 " AARP 's Movies for Grownups Awards ! scope="row " Academy Awards ! scope="row " British Academy Film Awards !
scope="row " Casting Society of America !
scope="row " rowspan="3 " Critics ' Choice Movie Awards !
scope="row " Heartland Film Festival !
scope="row " London Film Critics Circle !
scope="row " rowspan="5 " Make - Up Artists and Hair Stylists Guild ! scope="row " rowspan="3 " Saturn Awards !
scope="row " Seattle Film Critics Society !
scope="row "
Washington D.C. Area Film Critics Association !
scope="row " Women Film Critics Circle !
scope="row " rowspan="3 " Teen Choice Awards SEE
ALSO
* Mask ( 1985 film ) * Diary of a Wimpy Kid ( 2010 film ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS