IT COMES AT NIGHT
It Comes at Night is a 2017 American horror film written and directed by Trey Edward Shults .
It stars Joel Edgerton , Christopher Abbott , Carmen Ejogo , Kelvin Harrison Jr. , and Riley Keough .
The film had its premiere at the Overlook Film Festival in Mount Hood , Oregon on April 29 , 2017 , and was theatrically released on June 9 , 2017 in the United States , by A24 .
It was positively received by critics and grossed over $ 19 million worldwide .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
A highly contagious outbreak has ravaged the world .
Paul , his wife Sarah , and their teenage son Travis have secluded themselves in their home deep in the woods in an undisclosed location .
When Sarah 's father , Bud , contracts the disease , they kill him and burn his body in a shallow grave .
The next night , they capture an intruder breaking into the house .
Paul ties him to a tree and places a bag over his head overnight to confirm he is not suffering from the disease .
The stranger , Will , explains that he did not know the house was occupied and was only searching for fresh water for himself , his wife , and his young son .
Will offers to trade some of their supply of food for water .
Sarah suggests bringing Will 's family back to their home , reasoning that the more people they have with them , the easier it would be to defend themselves should anyone else discover their location .
Paul agrees , and he takes Will to collect his family .
Along the way , they are ambushed by two men .
Paul kills them and accuses Will of having set him up .
Will points out that he fought them as well and assuages Paul 's mistrust .
A few days later , Paul returns along with Will , his wife Kim , and son Andrew .
After establishing the rules that Paul and Sarah have used to stay safe , including keeping the only entrance locked with a key Paul or Sarah wear around their neck , and keeping nighttime excursions to a minimum , the two families begin to establish a sense of normality and grow closer to each other .
One day , Travis 's dog Stanley begins barking aggressively at and chases an unseen presence in the woods .
Travis follows the dog deeper into the woods before Stanley 's barking suddenly ceases .
Travis insists to Paul and Will that he heard something in the woods .
They decide to return home , as Paul insists Stanley knows the woods and will find his own way home .
That night , Will seemingly contradicts a story he had told Paul earlier about what he and Kim were doing prior to finding the abandoned house .
Paul 's response suggests an increasing level of distrust of Will .
That evening , Travis is awakened by a nightmare about his grandfather .
He discovers Andrew sleeping on the floor of Bud 's old room , also suffering from a nightmare .
Travis leads him back to his parents ' room before hearing a sound from downstairs .
Investigating , Travis finds that the front door of the house is slightly opened .
He wakes Paul and Will , who investigate further and find a bleeding and gravely sick Stanley lying on the floor .
They kill and burn the dog .
When Travis reveals that the door was already open when he came downstairs , Sarah suggests that a sleepwalking Andrew might have opened the door .
Kim argues the possibility , and as tensions between the two families begin to rise , Paul decides that they should isolate themselves in their own rooms for a couple of days so that they can calm down and ensure no one is infected .
The next morning , Travis overhears a distraught Kim telling Will that they need to leave .
Travis informs his parents that Andrew might be infected and , as such , he may be infected himself .
Paul and Sarah don protective masks and gloves and take weapons to confront Kim and Will , fearing that they may steal their food and water , or return later by force .
When Paul asks to be let in to see if Andrew is sick , Will draws a gun and takes Paul captive .
Will insists that his family is healthy and demands Paul give him a fair share of food and water so that they can leave .
Paul and Sarah overwhelm Will and force him and his family outside .
Will and Paul get into a brutal fight before Sarah shoots Will , who dies from his wound .
Kim flees into the woods with Andrew .
Paul fires after them , killing Andrew by mistake .
Kim hysterically begs Paul to kill her to end her misery , and he does .
Later , Travis awakens in bed , visibly sick .
His mother comforts him as he dies .
Some time later , Paul and Sarah , now both severely infected , sit at the dinner table in silence .
They share a shattered , devastated look as the film cuts to black .
CAST * Joel Edgerton as Paul , Sarah 's husband and Travis 's father * Christopher Abbott as Will , Kim 's husband and Andrew 's father * Carmen Ejogo as Sarah , Paul 's wife and Travis 's
mother
* Kelvin Harrison Jr. as Travis , Paul and Sarah 's son
* Riley Keough as Kim , Will 's wife and Andrew 's mother * Griffin Robert Faulkner as Andrew , Will and Kim 's son
* David Pendleton as Bud , Sarah 's father and Travis 's
grandfather * Chase Joliet and Mick O'Rourke as men who attack Paul and Will PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Shults began writing the film after the death of his father as a way of dealing with the pain .
He cites Pieter Bruegel the Elder 's 1562 oil painting The Triumph of Death as inspiration and it features prominently in the movie and its first trailer .
Although the film is post - apocalyptic Shults did not look to any other such films as inspiration ; instead , he cited the work of Paul Thomas Anderson and John Cassavetes and the films Night of the Living Dead and The Shining as inspirations .
To the later point , the film takes some influences from The Shinings Overlook Hotel in that the layout of the house is specifically obscure and never properly established .
Shults has described it " as this kind of labyrinth " and a metaphor for " the mesh of Travis ' head . "
In June 2016 , Joel Edgerton joined the cast of the film .
In August 2016 , it was announced that Christopher Abbott , Riley Keough and Carmen Ejogo had also joined the cast .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography began in August 2016 in New York .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film had its world premiere at The Overlook Film Festival at Timberline Lodge , Oregon , on April 29 , 2017 .
The film was scheduled to be released on August 25 , 2017 , but was rescheduled for June 9 , 2017 .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
It Comes at Night grossed $ 14 million in the United States and Canada and $ 5.7 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 19.7 million .
It Comes at Night was released alongside The Mummy and Megan Leavey , and was expected to gross around $ 7 million from 2,533 theaters in its opening weekend , with a chance of making as much as $ 12 million .
It made $ 700,000 from Thursday night previews and $ 2.4 million on its first day .
It ended up debuting to $ 6 million , finishing 6th at the box office .
Deadline Hollywood noted the film 's poor audience word - of - mouth led to a drop of potential Saturday and Sunday sales .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 87 % based on 217 reviews , with an average rating of 7.4/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " It Comes at Night makes lethally effective use of its bare - bones trappings while proving once again that what 's left unseen can be just as horrifying as anything on the screen . "
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score 78 out of 100 , based on 43 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews . "
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " D " on an A+ to F scale .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
!
scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Date of ceremony ! scope="col
" Category ! scope="col " Recipient(s ) and nominee(s ) ! scope="col " Result ! scope="col " class="unsortable " REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS