THE TERROR ( TV SERIES )
The Terror is an American horror drama anthology television series that premiered on AMC on March 25 , 2018 .
The series is named after Dan Simmons ' 2007 best - selling novel , a fictionalized account of Captain Sir John Franklin 's lost expedition to the Arctic in 1845–1848 , which serves as the basis for the series ' first season .
On June 22 , 2018 , it was announced that AMC had renewed the series for a ten - episode second season set to premiere in 2019 .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
The series begins with the Royal Navy 's polar explorer ships and having recently left Beechey Island , heading south toward King William Island into uncharted territory , seeking the Northwest Passage .
The ships are soon stuck , frozen and isolated , and those aboard must survive the harsh weather conditions and each other , while being stalked by an elusive menace .
CAST STARRING
* Jared Harris as Captain Francis Crozier * Tobias Menzies as Commander James Fitzjames
* Paul Ready as Dr. Harry Goodsir
* Adam Nagaitis as Cornelius Hickey
* Ian Hart as Thomas Blanky
* Nive Nielsen as Lady Silence
* Ciarán Hinds as Captain Sir John Franklin
RECURRING
SPECIAL GUEST
STAR
* Greta Scacchi as Lady Jane Franklin PRODUCTION SEASON 1
Section::::Production .
Section::::Season 1 .
After the success of the show
The Walking Dead , the American cable TV network AMC planned to create a horror TV series based on the novel The Terror .
In March 2016 , it was confirmed that AMC ordered 10 episodes of the show , with an expected premiere date in 2018 .
David Kajganich and Soo Hugh serve as co - showrunners , while Kajganich penned the adaptation .
Ridley Scott , Alexandra Milchan , Scott Lambert , David W. Zucker , and Guymon Casady are executive producers .
In September 2016 , it was announced that Tobias Menzies was cast as a series lead and the showrunners were seeking an Inuit woman , between the ages of 16–30 , to play an unspecified ' major character ' , most likely Lady Silence .
Most of the scenes on the ice were made with CGI .
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
Season two of The Terror is co - created by Max Borenstein and Alexander Woo , who will also be the showrunner .
The series will return in 2019 with 10 episodes .
It will take place on the west coast of the United States during World War II , and according to the press release , " center on an uncanny specter that menaces a Japanese - American community from its home in Southern California to the internment camps to the war in the Pacific " .
Derek Mio will play the lead role of Chester Nakayama , a son of Japanese born immigrants who joins the army .
Josef Kubota Wladyka will direct the first episode of the season .
George Takei , Kiki Sukezane , Miki Ishikawa , Shingo Usami and Naoko Mori were cast in the second season , with Takei also serving in a consulting role .
EPISODES DISTRIBUTION Section::::Distribution .
The series premiered on AMC in the United States and Canada on March 25 , 2018 , and concluded on May 21 , 2018 .
It was released worldwide on Amazon Prime Video in every other country where the service is present ( except Canada , UK and some Middle Eastern countries ) starting March 26 , 2018 .
Amazon released most of the first season ahead of its broadcast on AMC .
In the United Kingdom , The Terror premiered on AMC on April 24 , 2018 .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the series has an approval rating of 93 % based on 44 reviews , with an average rating of 8.55/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " A thriller wrapped in a prestige drama package , The Terror makes for gripping , atmospheric supernatural horror .
"
Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned a score of 76 out of 100 based on 18 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
RATINGS
NOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Interview with historical advisor Matthew Betts on Sloan Science & Film