A PLACE TO CALL HOME ( SEASON 4 )
The fourth season of the Seven Network television series A Place to Call Home premiered on Showcase on 11 September 2016 .
The series was produced by Chris Martin - Jones , and executive produced by Penny Win and Julie McGauran .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On 15 October 2014 , it was announced that Foxtel had finalised a deal with Channel Seven that would see third and fourth seasons written , using the outlines created by Bevan Lee , produced by Seven Productions , but aired on Foxtel .
On 25 October 2014 , Amy Harris of The Daily Telegraph announced that A Place to Call Home had been officially renewed for another two seasons and would return in late 2015 , airing on Foxtel channel SoHo .
It was also announced that all the original cast and crew members would return .
Production on the fourth season began on 29 February 2016 and concluded on 5 August 2016 .
The episode order was extended from the usual 10 episodes to 12 , with Foxtel 's Director of Television , Brian Walsh stating , " we have extended the commission order to 12 episodes this year because the storylines are so strong " .
Having departed the series at the end of the second season , Bevan Lee returned to helm this year as Script Executive , with Katherine Thomson taking over from Susan Bower as Script Producer .
Shirley Barrett , Kriv Stenders , Catherine Millar and Tony Krawitz serve as directors for this season .
Of the show 's return , Foxtel 's Head of Drama , Penny Win stated , " Working with Seven Productions on A Place to Call Home 's has resulted in fantastic achievements for the series .
With record breaking audiences for the SoHo channel , the passionate and dedicated fans and the growing audience around the world , the show is a testament to Foxtel 's commitment to great Australian storytelling .
"
Seven 's Head of Drama , Julie McGauran stated , " A Place to Call Home has been a hugely successful collaboration between Seven Productions and Foxtel .
Together we 've been able to engineer a wonderful partnership for everyone , especially the fans , who have so much to look forward to in season 4 .
"
The series was also planned to air on Showcase , after SoHo was closed by Foxtel .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In this season , the characters are strongly affected by two contrasting social issues in 1954 .
The first is the conservative wave of fear generated by the " Reds Under the Beds " scare surrounding the Petrov Affair .
The second , the wave of liberal change that opened up new social and moral choices for Australians at the time .
CAST MAIN * Marta Dusseldorp as Sarah Nordmann
* Noni Hazelhurst as Elizabeth Bligh * Brett Climo as George Bligh * Craig Hall as Dr. Jack Duncan * David Berry as James Bligh * Abby Earl as Anna Poletti * Arianwen Parkes - Lockwood as Olivia Bligh * Aldo Mignone as Gino Poletti * Sara Wiseman as Carolyn Duncan * Jenni Baird as Regina Bligh * Frankie J. Holden as Roy Briggs RECURRING & GUEST * Deborah Kennedy as Doris Collins
* Brenna Harding as Rose O'Connell * Heather Mitchell as Prudence Swanson
* Mark Lee as Sir Richard Bennett
* Tim Draxl as Dr. Henry Fox
* Dominic Allburn as Harry Polson
* Rohan Nichol as Sergeant Brian Taylor
* Rick Donald as Lloyd Ellis Parker * Robert Coleby as Douglas Goddard * Leigh Scully as Gordon Walsh * Alan Dearth as Robert Menzies EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
RATINGS
Section::::Ratings . !
No . !
Title !
Air date !
Viewers !
Rank REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS