THE LION KING ( 2019 FILM )
The Lion King is an upcoming American drama film directed by Jon Favreau and produced by Walt Disney Pictures .
It is a photorealistic computer animated remake of Disney 's traditionally animated 1994 film of the same name .
The film features the voices of Donald Glover , Seth Rogen , Chiwetel Ejiofor , Billy Eichner , John Oliver , Keegan - Michael Key , Beyoncé Knowles - Carter , and James Earl Jones .
Plans for a remake of The Lion King were confirmed in September 2016 following the success of Favreau 's The Jungle Book .
Much of the main cast signed in early 2017 and principal photography began in mid-2017 on a blue screen stage in Los Angeles .
The film is scheduled to be released on July 19 , 2019 .
VOICE CAST
* Donald Glover as Simba , the crown prince of the Pride Lands .
* JD McCrary as young Simba * Seth Rogen as Pumbaa , a naive common warthog who befriends and adopts a young Simba after he runs away from home .
* Chiwetel Ejiofor as Scar , the treacherous brother of Mufasa and the uncle of Simba who seeks to take the mantle of king .
* Billy Eichner as Timon , a wise - cracking and loyal meerkat who befriends and adopts a young Simba after he runs away from home .
* John Oliver as Zazu , a hornbill who is the advisor to the King of the Pride Lands .
* Keegan - Michael Key as Kamari , a hyena and is part of Scar 's henchmen .
This character replaces Banzai from the original 1994 animated film .
* Beyoncé Knowles - Carter as Nala , Simba 's childhood best friend and future love - interest .
* Shahadi Wright Joseph as young Nala
* James Earl Jones as Mufasa , the king of the Pride Lands and the father of Simba .
Jones reprises his role from the original 1994 animated film .
Section::::Voice cast .
Additionally , John Kani voices Rafiki , a wise mandrill who serves as the shaman of the Pride Lands and a close friend of Mufasa 's .
Florence Kasumba and Eric Andre
portray as Shenzi and Azizi , two hyenas and Scar 's henchmen .
While Shenzi is a character that featured in the original film , Azizi replaces Ed from the original film .
Alfre Woodard voices Sarabi , queen of the Pride Lands , Mufasa 's mate , and Simba 's mother .
Amy Sedaris voices an unspecified elephant shrew , a character not featured in the original film .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
On September 28 , 2016 , Walt Disney Pictures confirmed that Jon Favreau would be directing a remake of the 1994 animated film The Lion King , which would feature the songs from the 1994 film , following a string of recent box office successes on the other Disney remake films such as Maleficent , Cinderella , Favreau 's The Jungle Book and Beauty and the Beast with the latter three also earning critical praise .
Later on October 13 , it was reported that Disney had hired Jeff Nathanson to write the screenplay for the remake , with the story written by Brenda Chapman .
In November , talking with ComingSoon.net , Favreau said the virtual cinematography technology he used in The Jungle Book would be used to a greater degree in The Lion King .
Although the media reported The Lion King to be a live - action film , it actually utilizes photorealistic computer - generated animation .
Disney also did not describe it as live - action , only stating it would follow the " technologically groundbreaking " approach of The Jungle Book .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
In mid - February 2017 , Donald Glover was cast as Simba , with James Earl Jones reprising his role as Mufasa from the 1994 film .
In April 2017 , Billy Eichner and Seth Rogen were cast to play Timon and Pumbaa respectively .
In July 2017 , John Oliver was cast as Zazu .
In August 2017 , Alfre Woodard and John Kani were announced to play Sarabi and Rafiki , respectively .
Earlier in March 2017 , it was announced that Beyoncé was Favreau 's top choice for the role of Nala and that the director and studio would be willing to do whatever it took to accommodate her busy schedule .
Later on November 1 , 2017 , her role was confirmed in an official announcement , which also confirmed that Chiwetel Ejiofor would play the role of Scar as he had impressed Favreau after watching his antagonistic performance as Baron Mordo in Doctor Strange ( 2016 ) .
Other stars Eric Andre , Florence Kasumba , and Keegan - Michael Key will be the voices of Azizi , Shenzi and Kamari while JD McCrary and Shahadi Wright Joseph will be the voices of young Simba and young Nala , respectively .
In November 2018 , Amy Sedaris was announced as having been cast in a role created for the film .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Production on the film commenced in mid-2017 in Los Angeles , California , utilizing " virtual - reality tools " , per Visual Effects Supervisor Rob Legato .
Virtual Production Supervisor Girish Balakrishnan said on his professional website that the filmmakers used motion capture and VR / AR technologies .
POST - PRODUCTION Section::::Post - production .
This will serve as the final credit for film editor Mark Livolsi , who died in September 2018 .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
On November 1 , 2017 , it was announced that Hans Zimmer would return to score the film , having previously scored the 1994 animated version .
On November 28 , 2017 , it was reported that Elton John had signed onto the project to rework his musical compositions from the original film before his retirement .
The following day it was reported that Beyoncé would be assisting John in the reworking of the soundtrack .
On February 9 , 2018 , John reported that he , Tim Rice and Beyoncé would create a new song for the end credits of the film .
Later that month , it was revealed that four songs from the original film would be included in the film : "
Can You Feel the Love Tonight " , " Hakuna Matata " , "
I Just Ca n't Wait to Be King " , and " Circle of Life " .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
The first teaser trailer for The Lion King debuted during the annual Dallas Cowboys ' Thanksgiving day game on November 22 , 2018 .
The trailer was viewed 224.6 million times in its first 24 hours , becoming the then 2nd
most viewed trailer in that time period .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The Lion King is scheduled to be released on July 19 , 2019 , which marks the 25th anniversary of the release of the original film .
The Lion King will be one of the first theatrical films to be released on Disney+ alongside Toy Story 4 , Frozen 2 and Captain Marvel .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS