2017 IVY LEAGUE MEN 'S BASKETBALL TOURNAMENT
The 2017 Ivy League Men 's Basketball Tournament was a postseason conference tournament for the Ivy League .
The tournament was March 11 and 12 , 2017 at the Palestra on the campus of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia .
The tournament marked the first postseason tournament held by the Ivy League in men 's basketball .
Princeton , the regular season champions and undefeated in conference play , beat Yale in the championship to win the tournament championship .
As a result , Princeton received the conference 's automatic bid to the NCAA Tournament . BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
The Ivy League was the last NCAA Division
I conference to hold a postseason tournament , instead choosing to award its automatic bids to the NCAA men 's and women 's tournaments to its regular - season champions ; in the event that two teams finished tied atop the standings
, Ivy League bylaws allowed for a one - game playoff to determine the championship , and in exceptionally rare cases , a three - team single - elimination tournament would be scheduled if three teams tied atop the standings ( the Ivy League never had more than three regular season co - champions in one season ) .
The Ivy League has historically resisted postseason play in all of its sports .
In March 2016 , the League announced that it would institute men 's and women 's conference tournaments beginning with the 2016–17 season .
Both tournaments would initially be held at the same site .
The conference also reduced by one the number of regular - season games that its members are allowed to schedule .
SEEDS
Section::::Seeds .
The top four teams in the Ivy League regular - season standings qualified for the tournament and were seeded according to their records in conference play , resulting in a Shaughnessy playoff . !
Seed !
School !
Conf .
Record SCHEDULE Section::::Schedule .
!
Session !
Game !
Time * !
Matchup !
Score !
Television !
Attendance !
colspan=7Semifinals – Saturday , March 11 rowspan=21 1 1:30
pm No . 1
Princeton vs.
No . 4
Penn 72–66
rowspan=2 ESPNU rowspan=2 2 4:00 pm No .
2 Harvard vs. No . 3
Yale 71–73 ! colspan=7Championship – Sunday , March 12 2 3 12:00 pm
No . 1
Princeton vs. No . 3
Yale
ESPN2 BRACKET ALL - TOURNAMENT TEAM
SEE ALSO
* 2017 Ivy League Women 's Basketball Tournament REFERENCES