HELLRAISER :
JUDGMENT Hellraiser :
Judgment is a 2018 American horror film starring Damon Carney , Randy Wayne , Alexandra Harris , Heather Langenkamp , and Paul T. Taylor as Pinhead .
It is the tenth installment in the Hellraiser film series created by Clive Barker , written and directed by the series ' longtime FX artist Gary J. Tunnicliffe .
Unable to direct his screenplay for due to a scheduling conflict , Tunnicliffe initially removed all references to the series from his Judgment concept and tried to have it funded as an independent film in 2013 .
He intended on making a " true " Hellraiser film because of his disappointment with the later films .
Several years later , Dimension Films was required to make another Hellraiser film to retain its rights to the series , giving Tunnicliffe a chance to propose his vision to the studio .
The concept was initially rejected but accepted after he negotiated changes with the studio executives .
It was filmed in Oklahoma with , both films produced by Michael Leahy .
The plot centers on three police detectives who , investigating a series of murders , are confronted by the denizens of hell .
Some scenes were deemed too graphic by the studio , and were self - censored .
Although Tunnicliffe asked actor Doug Bradley to return as priest of hell .
Pinhead ( a series mainstay )
, Bradley declined when he learned that he would be required to sign a non - disclosure agreement to read the script .
Judgment is the second Hellraiser film without Bradley in the role , having been replaced by Stephen Smith Collins in Revelations .
Newcomer Paul T. Taylor was cast after impressing Tunnicliffe in an audition for another character , and auditioned again for Pinhead .
He and Tunnicliffe decided to develop a new look and interpretation of the character , rather than imitating Bradley 's performance .
Mike Jay Regan reprised his role as the Chatterer , Pinhead 's servant in several of the earlier sequels .
The film expands the franchise 's fictional universe by introducing a new faction of hell , the Stygian Inquisition , who are distinct from the recurring Cenobites .
The Cenobites offer sadomasochistic pleasures to humans who enter their dominion , while the Inquisition processes the souls of sinners .
Tunnicliffe plays the Inquisition 's auditor , a prominent role in the film .
Judgment was scheduled for release in 2017 with minimal marketing to avoid negative publicity , but was temporarily shelved .
According to Taylor , its release was not a priority for Dimension until the sexual abuse allegations involving parent company co - founder Harvey Weinstein ( when the film was put back into post production ) .
It was distributed by Lionsgate Films in video on demand and home media on February 13 , 2018 .
Although critics compared the film favorably to its predecessors , its low budget and police procedural aspects were criticized .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In hell , the Cenobite Pinhead and the Auditor of the Stygian Inquisition ( Gary J. Tunnicliffe ) are discussing how to adapt their methods of harvesting souls in the face of advancing human technology which is making the Configurations ( gateways to hell ) obsolete .
On Earth , three detectives – brothers Sean and David Carter ( Randy Wayne ) and Christine Egerton – investigate a serial killer known as the Preceptor , whose murders are based on the Ten Commandments .
A connection with one of the victims leads the detectives to Karl Watkins , a local criminal who went missing near the abandoned house at 55 Ludovico Place .
Sean goes to the house and loses consciousness , waking up in the Stygian Inquisition 's domain in hell .
As the Inquisition prepares to hand down a verdict on Sean for his sins , the angel Jophiel intervenes and tells them to release him .
Sean escapes the realm with a stolen puzzle box , and the Auditor requests Pinhead 's guidance on the matter .
Sean and his brother return to search the house , finding no trace of hell or the Inquisition .
That night he is haunted by visions of the Cenobites and hell 's denizens , who promise " judgment and redemption " to anyone who opens the box .
Sean and Egerton go to the coroner 's office and find that a cell phone of one of the Preceptor 's victims was stored in her body , recording her final location with its GPS .
They find the Preceptor 's hideout , where Sean incapacitates Egerton and reveals himself as the killer .
David deduces the Preceptor 's identity and meets with the coroner to find the building .
Sean disarms David and summons his wife , Alison ( Rheagan Wallace ) , outraged that she had a secret affair .
He forces the two of them to open the box at gunpoint , summoning the Cenobites and opening a gateway to their realm .
Aware that someone from hell would come to collect his soul after his initial escape , Sean attempts to offer Alison and David to Pinhead .
Pinhead tells him that Alison and David will be dealt with for opening the box
but , because a separate faction of hell wanted his soul , no deal will be made .
The Auditor appears , telling Sean that the Inquisition has found him guilty of his sins .
Jophiel intervenes again and tells Pinhead and the Auditor that Sean is part of heaven 's plan to instill fear into sinners .
Pinhead arranges for Sean to be killed by Egerton , and spitefully dispatches Jophiel .
As punishment , God expels Pinhead from hell and forces him to walk the earth as a mortal man .
In a post - credits scene , a group of Mormon missionaries in Germany approach a house and are captured by the Stygian Inquisition .
CAST AND CHARACTERS
* Damon Carney as Detective Sean Carter /
The Preceptor , Sean is a police detective who investigates a string of murders and discovers an other - worldly threat .
Unbeknownst to his colleagues , he murders people who violate the Ten Commandments .
Disliking some of the script 's fantastical elements , Carney approached the role from a grounded perspective .
* Randy Wayne as Detective David Carter , Sean 's partner during the investigation .
Wayne initially questioned some of Tunnicliffe 's decisions ; according to the director , " It 's not a problem for me , I 've never had a problem defending the actions of a character I 'm directing and
I 'm also not unwilling to hear suggestions .
I think Randy wants to trust the Director and you have to earn that by showing respect for the process .
Once that trust was established , Randy relaxed and found David . "
* Alexandra Harris as Detective Christine Egerton , who assists Sean and David in the murder investigation .
Although Christine did not appear in the original story , the studio suggested her as a foil to Sean and David .
* Heather Langenkamp as the Landlady , Langenkamp , known for her role as Nancy Thompson in A Nightmare on Elm Street , plays an obscene , cigarette - smoking landlady in Judgment .
Casting director Chris Freihofer , who was acquainted with Langenkamp , showed her the screenplay before suggesting her to Tunnicliffe .
The director was pleased that Langenkamp agreed to take part in the film , since she is regularly offered horror - film roles .
* Paul T. Taylor as Pinhead , Pinhead is the leader of the Cenobites , a religious faction of mutilated humans in hell who belong to the Order of the Gash and offer those who solve the Lament Configuration sadomasochistic pleasures .
His face is marked with cuts arranged in a grid , with nails inserted into the intersections of creased flesh .
Taylor made his debut as the priest of hell , who was played by Doug Bradley in the first eight films and Stephen Smith Collins in .
According to Taylor , in Pinhead 's Judgment character arc events directly affect him ( unlike the most - recent sequels , with " him just showing up and doing his job . " )
Tunnicliffe was inspired by in crafting Pinhead 's fate in Judgment climax : " I got to a point where I was writing the end of the film , and I thought , ' I 'm not gon na have somebody hold the box up , close it , and say , ' Go to Hell ' .
I just could n't do it again .
It 's like one of those what ifs where you go , ' Well , he came from being immortal .
We saw him birthed in Hellbound , ' which I really loved , and I thought , ' If you 're the king , then the very worst thing that can happen to you is you get stripped and thrown out with the paupers . ' "
The filmmaker said that if he had had the budget , Pinhead would have been stripped of his pins and his clothing shredded .
He suggested an ending in which a naked , now - human Pinhead is found on a rainy night bleeding in a gutter by a policeman , with the grid still in his face .
* Gary J. Tunnicliffe as the Auditor , a clerk in hell who notes a person 's sin before sending the person to the Assessor for judgment .
The Auditor 's typewriter paper is made of flesh and inked in blood ; he often carries a music box , its song a comforting remnant of his human past .
According to Tunnicliffe , the character is German .
Not a Cenobite , he is part of the Stygian Inquisition separate from the Order of the Gash ( one of hell 's many orders ) .
There are many auditors in the Inquisition ; Tunnicliffe 's character shares the faction with the Assessor , the Jury , the Butcher and the Surgeon .
Other members ( the Bone Collectors , the Seamstress , the Sentinels , the Order of Exudation , and the Effluviam ) were planned for introduction but removed for budgetary reasons .
The character was influenced by Sam Lowry from Brazil and Itzhak Stern from Schindler 's List .
The Stygian Inquisition lures their victims ( candidates ) to houses on earth which connect to hell , evaluating their sins and desires to decide their fate .
Occasionally , its victims are deemed more suited to the Cenobites .
Time and budget contributed to Tunnicliffe 's playing the character , allowing him to come in before shooting to apply the make - up ; prosthetics could be applied in advance , and a body double could be used as needed .
He accepted acting advice from a number of sources ( including Damon Carney ) , and Mike Leahy and script supervisor Pepper helped direct his on - screen scenes .
Tunnicliffe said , " I 've been acting for many years , I love the franchise and I wanted to play the character .
I thought in the very worst - case scenario if I suck , then I can dub myself later ! "
* John Gulager as the Assessor , a gluttonous member of the Stygian Inquisition who processes pages given to him by the Auditor and passes the results to the Jury .
Although Tunnicliffe had never seen filmmaker John Gulager act , he knew that Gulager is an actor and wrote the Assessor for him .
Gulager directed several horror films , including the Feast series and Piranha 3DD .
*
Mike Jay Regan as the Chatterer , a Cenobite and follower of the Order of the Gash with facial deformities and continuously - clicking teeth .
Succeeding Nicholas Vince in the role , Regan played the Chatterer Torso in and the Chatterer in , , and . Section::::Cast and characters .
Grace Montie plays Crystal Lanning , a dog - loving socialite whose murder begins the story .
Rheagan Wallace plays Alison Carter , Sean 's wife .
Diane Goldner plays a Cleaner : an aging nude woman and part of the Stygian Inquisition who forces her tongue on victims as penance .
Tunnicliffe conceived the Cleaners as in their nineties ( similar to the three Witches from Macbeth ) , saying that his worst nightmare would be being chained to a bed with old women licking him clean .
Andi Powers plays one of the Jury , three nude women in their twenties with skinless faces who hand down verdicts from the Inquisition .
Other acting credits include Jeff Fenter as sinner Karl Watkins and Helena Grace Donald as the angel Jophiel .
Judgment is the first Hellraiser film to include heaven in its mythology .
According to Tunnicliffe , " There 's a lot more religious aspects to this film , and that was kind of inspired by what Clive [ Barker ] had done in The Scarlet Gospels .
I am in no way religious , but if you are writing a story that acknowledges the existence of Hell , then you have to acknowledge the existence of Heaven .
I 'm a big fan of things like Constantine and Prophecy , so it was fun bringing those characters into it . "
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Decades before the development of Hellraiser : Judgment , Dimension Films obtained the rights to the Hellraiser and Children of the Corn film series ; Dimension 's first films were and , shot back - to - back in North Carolina in 1991 .
Since then , the company has been required to produce films in both series to retain the rights .
Around the release of in 1996 , Gary Tunnicliffe ( who was involved with the special effects of and Bloodline ) pitched a Hellraiser story entitled Holy War to Dimension executive Bob Weinstein ; an opening scene , about a priest seeking a path to heaven through suffering , was storyboarded .
According to Tunnicliffe , Weinstein overlooked it and re - evaluated the franchise after the success of the slasher film Scream .
Tunnicliffe continued to provide special effects for the franchise 's sequels through ( 2005 ) , which all went direct - to - video after Bloodline , but was unhappy with the quality of the films .
Nearing a later deadline to retain Hellraiser and Children of the Corn , Dimension Films offered him an opportunity to write and direct a Hellraiser sequel .
Tunnicliffe wrote the screenplay for 2011 's , but could n't direct it due to an FX scheduling conflict with Scream 4 .
Although most of the direct - to - video Hellraiser sequels were conceived as original screenplays which were converted into Hellraiser films , Tunnicliffe 's idea for Judgment was intended as part of the series from its conception .
He removed its Hellraiser elements after trying to meet with Dimension , who were uninterested in making another Hellraiser film immediately after Revelations .
Tunnicliffe showed Judgment to Mike Jay Regan , who enjoyed its premise and suggested the removal of Pinhead for a standalone project .
He then attempted to make it as an independent film , but failed to find financial backers , leading to an unsuccessful Kickstarter campaign in 2013 .
Five years after being unable to direct Revelations , Dimension ( facing another rights - retention deadline ) offered Tunnicliffe the job of writing and directing another Hellraiser film .
The studio told him that production would be less rushed than Revelations , and asked him for script ideas .
Tunnicliffe pitched Hellraiser :
Judgment to Dimension three times ( being rejected each time ) , and wrote a script treatment for a more traditional Hellraiser film entitled Enter Darkness to demonstrate that he could come up with other ideas .
The treatment 's plot involved psychiatric hospital interns studying patients with shared experiences of the Lament Configuration , while the head doctor collates them to meet the Cenobites himself .
The studio approved it , but Tunnicliffe insisted on making Judgment .
Dimension told him to write the script for Judgment with the proviso that if they disliked it , he would direct Enter Darkness without being paid .
After reading it , they allowed Tunnicliffe to direct Judgment as part of the series after negotiating rewrites , notes , and suggested changes .
Despite the film 's origin as a Hellraiser project , Tunnicliffe intended to differentiate Judgment from its predecessors ; his mantra was " innovate , not replicate " .
Saying that Judgment " will have moments unlike any other [ film ] you have ever seen " , he was inspired by the works of Hieronymus Bosch , Francis Bacon , David Cronenberg , David Lynch , David Fincher , and Hellraiser creator Clive Barker : " I knew what I wanted to make , and I felt like ' you know what , I wrote a traditional Hellraiser story with Revelations and I got raped by the fans .
I 'm not going to try and appease the fans anymore .
' I 'm going to make a film for me
and I have a very strong idea visually on where I want to go with the story and
its going to be very different .
I 'm going to make a food for me and offer everybody a bite . "
About the poor reception of the series ' most - recent entries , Tunnicliffe said : " I think there has been a huge gap since Dimension are actually trying to do their best by the franchise .
Judgment is a rights - issue movie , but has been made with the sensibilities and input given to a regular budgeted Dimension feature . "
Acknowledging the negative reaction to Revelations , he said he was unhappy that he could not direct the film , with its final cut and divergences from the script :
" To the fans , I would say this ...
I know you 've been let down , and trust me , I have too , but simply give me a chance .
I know we can never make a film as great as the first two Hellraisers , but I think we have a fun script here [ and ] an opportunity to give you all something that feels a little familiar , a little different , completely terrifying and is a worthy part of the Hellraiser canon . " ORIGINAL STORY Section::::Original story .
Tunnicliffe 's original synopsis began with a Christian missionary approaching a rundown house to spread the Gospel and being captured by the Auditor at the door .
The film 's next fifteen to twenty minutes would focus on the missionary 's audit as he is processed ( judged ) by the Auditor , the Assessor , the Jury , the Surgeon , the Butcher , the Seamstress , and the Bone Collectors .
Two days later , a police officer is captured by the Auditor when he searches for the missing missionary .
( Tunnicliffe wanted the scenes in hell to be more nightmarish than they were in the finished film . )
The Assessor chokes on the pages of the policeman 's sins during the audit , leading the distraught Auditor to seek assistance from Pinhead .
Pinhead gathers the Chatterer and the Female Cenobite to find out what went wrong .
Flashbacks show several police investigations , misleading the audience into thinking that the police officer is innocent .
An angel confronts Pinhead , demanding the police officer 's release .
The officer leaves the house , returning to raid it with armed colleagues , but find it to be empty .
Pinhead and the Auditor review the officer 's sins , discover that he is not innocent , and confront the angel .
The next day , the officer awakens to the Cenobites invading his home .
The audience learns about his sins , and the next fifteen minutes of the film would involve the Cenobites capturing and tormenting him .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Judgment was cast by a team led by casting director Chris Feihofer .
Gary Tunnicliffe wanted Doug Bradley to reprise his role as Pinhead , the lead cenobite ; Bradley refused , criticizing Dimension Films for the quality of the Hellraiser sequels .
Tunnicliffe pleaded with him , but Bradley again declined when he learned that he would have to sign a non - disclosure agreement to obtain the screenplay .
The NDA was intended to prevent Bradley from publicly disparaging the script if he disliked it .
It was not tailored specifically for Bradley , but was a template from another film with the titles replaced .
In an interview with Bloody - Disgusting , Bradley said : " I 'm not really in a position to comment on Judgment , having been prevented from reading the script .
For the moment I only have Gary [ Tunnicliffe ] 's comments to go by .
He certainly talks a good game : let 's wait for the proof of the pudding .
It 's depressing that , as with Revelations , this again seems to be happening to save Dimension from losing the franchise rights . "
According to Tunnicliffe , Dimension Films suggested that he play the role ( after he played Pinhead in the fan film No More Souls ) but he declined over concerns about fan backlash .
Paul T. Taylor was cast as Pinhead , and Tunnicliffe played the Auditor .
He described Taylor as " a classically trained stage and film actor who brings a great physical presence and more than a hint of Peter Cushing and Ralph Fiennes .
" It was announced that Mike Jay Regan would reprise his role as the Chatterer , and Heather Langenkamp would play a character in the film .
Taylor became involved when he received an email inviting him to screen test as the Auditor ; after the test , he was asked to audition as Pinhead .
The audition took place in Los Angeles , where Taylor thought he " nailed " his performance .
Tunnicliffe allowed him to interpret the character , and he was given months to prepare before filming began .
The preparation included smoking ( unusual for the actor ) , to give his voice a gravelly quality .
He took late - night walks in high - crime neighborhoods near his home , which he described as " facing the fear " .
He said of his performance , " I have a vulnerability in my acting no matter what I do .
It 's just there ...
It 's about the stillness .
[ Pinhead ] 's already so terrifying that when he makes a move , it means something .
He 's very economical and when he speaks , he 's so eloquent .
" Believing that " Pinhead has to be British " , the American actor used a British accent .
For research , he visited a comic - book store to read Hellraiser comic books in which Pinhead appeared .
Tunnicliffe detailed his reasons for selecting Taylor : "
He was well prepared and willing to listen but also keen to make the character his own , this was not to be an ' impersonation ' , I wanted a slightly different Pinhead for this new tale , there 's a stillness , a dry resolve to this new version , coldness , sarcasm .
I wanted a Pinhead with a regal sense of arrogance and boredom and Paul delivered .
"
Peter Cushing 's Grand Moff Tarkin in Star Wars was sometimes used as a reference point during filming ; if Tunnicliffe felt that Taylor was going off course in his performance , he asked him to repeat " " to help bring him back into Pinhead 's mindset .
FILMING AND EDITING Section::::Filming and editing .
Filming of Hellraiser :
Judgment took place over a three - week period in Oklahoma , on a relatively small budget .
Tunnicliffe and cinematographer Samuel Calvin prepared substantially beforehand to maximize shooting time , using a daily average of 30 to 35 complex camera and lighting set - ups .
According to Tunnicliffe , all departments were enthusiastic about their work and a work day never exceeded thirteen hours .
Filming locations included a derelict building , a bar , a luxury apartment building and penthouse suite , a church interior , a children 's playground , alleys , and stages and sets built by the film 's art department .
Tunnicliffe said that one of the lead actresses nearly fainted during the filming of a particularly - graphic scene , and three people fled the set to vomit during the filming of another scene .
Some actors had to be persuaded to arrive at certain shoots , partially because of the film 's budget .
Tunnicliffe said about filming , " I 'm a great believer in really using the time on set .
You only get up to twelve to thirteen hours a day , maximum , and I do n't like going over time and over budget .
I like to have a strong plan going in and
the way I do that is that I act out the entire script with my D.P. [ director of photography ] , we act out everybody 's roles in every scene .
We pick our angles based on that . "
Local residents contributed to the shoot by suggesting specific locations , and a car dealership loaned a van for the film .
Paul T. Taylor shot his scenes in an Oklahoma City studio , where a set for the " offices of hell " was built .
The film was shot at the same time and place as Children of the Corn : Runaway , also produced by Mike Leahy ; Judgment actor John Gulager directed the latter .
According to Leahy , " Blood has been flowing here in Oklahoma City .
These are two horror films that are going to be seen by a core audience . "
Another three weeks were devoted to editing , and the film 's limited budget restricted the number of lengthy edits .
This was followed by the implementation of color timing , sound , and music .
The score was composed by Deron Johnson , who was influenced by Trent Reznor and the score of Se7en .
Although Tunnicliffe 's original cut had cues from Christopher Young 's orchestral soundtrack from Hellraiser and Hellbound , a more - modern approach was adopted for budgetary reasons .
The domains of hell inhabited by the Cenobites and the Stygian Inquisition were distinguished by color , with a blue palette used for the Cenobites ' domain and a " piss " yellow applied to the Inquisition 's .
Some of the film 's sexual content and violence was deemed too extreme by the studio , and was removed .
Tunnicliffe said , " I do n't think people could stomach my original version .
The studio certainly could n't .
I 've been simulating killing people in movies for over twenty years .
I could have easily made the film ten to fifteen minutes longer with a more intense cut , but it would probably be TOO much .
In the end , wiser heads prevailed . "
Among Judgment deleted content were a longer scene of Karl Watkins being skinned to death by the Inquisition 's surgeon , and scenes involving the Cleaners .
The original version of the sex scene between Sean and Alison Carter was more intense , with the camera cutting back and forth between Sean 's view of his wife and visions of the Cenobites .
Several false endings were conceived for the scene , including Sean 's hallucination of Alison fellating him when he looks up after his orgasm to see David Carter smiling back at him .
The nightmare scene in which Sean enters an alley and sees flashes of hell was originally longer and more graphic ; at one point , he stumbles across Alison as part of a threesome behind a dumpster with two strange men in pig masks .
Tunnicliffe wanted to use surreal imagery to convey that " Sean 's world was being torn apart , undone by his experiences at the house within the hellish dimension . "
In Judgment original concept pitch , the Jury eats the Assessor 's regurgitated pages ( not sifting through them ) before handing down its verdict on the Stygian Inquisition 's captives .
Dialogue and character- and plot - development scenes were also trimmed .
SPECIAL EFFECTS Section::::Special effects .
The makeup - effects team was led by Mike Regan and Mike Measimer , who helped bring to life Pinhead , Chatterer , the Stitch Twins , the Butcher , the Surgeon , and the Auditor .
Paul T. Taylor 's portrayal of Pinhead was intended to be leaner , meaner and more no - nonsense than previous incarnations of the character , lacking the earlier films ' glib one - liners .
This was incorporated into the makeup and costume design , with longer silver pins , deeper blade - slice cuts , solid black eyes and a more - visceral , sleeker wardrobe .
The character 's original attire was replaced with a ragged robe and butcher 's skirt made of chain mail .
His many tools and weapons were replaced by a streamlined skinning utensil .
Some grid - like cuts were rearranged from his previous design , with one square removed from each side of his jaw and one added to the back of his head .
The flesh exposed on his chest was made a rhombus in honor of Leviathan , the god worshiped by the Cenobites ; an homage to the Eye of Agamotto symbolism from Doctor Strange was integrated into the costume .
The Lament Configuration was also altered , built with bleached wood and copper etching .
The self - inflicted lacerations on the Auditor 's face were intended to be less patterned and more chaotic than that of the more - ordered Cenobites .
The facial cuts ' positions were borrowed from an unsolicited redesign for Pinhead which Tunnicliffe had created for Pascal Laugier 's cancelled Hellraiser remake .
A blood - stained shirt and threadbare two - piece suit cover the cuts on the Auditor 's body .
Religious symbols , implicitly torn from the necks of the guilty , are on the bracelet of his right wrist .
His black spectacles convey the impression of soulless eyes .
Tunnicliffe had to balance directing the film and overseeing the FX work .
About the quality of the blood effects , he said : " I do n't think it 's so much the quantity of blood but more the nature of the effects , the content and the context .
I think some of our blood gags are actually quite beautiful ; when you see blood raining down on a naked girl with a skinned face at 300 frames per second you ca n't help but be mesmerized by the fluid dynamics .
"
Taylor compared the simulated gore to that of the Saw series : " I think people are going to be fascinated with it and the things that are , what I would say , on the border of horror porn , there 's some elements of that in it and that will please many Hellraiser fans and fans of just what contemporary horror can be these days where it 's just a gross - out . "
He later clarified , " I think [ the gore in the film ] is done because of the style and aesthetics in a beautiful way .
This is not masturbation , and let 's just throw blood at the screen . "
Tunnicliffe sent pictures to the wardrobe department of what he wanted the characters to wear , and the department measured the actors .
Costumes designed and built for the Cenobites were handled by Tunnicliffe 's department .
He chose to have certain characters nude because he thought it would look visually more interesting than designing cheap costumes .
The costume department used a cast of Paul Taylor 's head to design a pin mask for him to wear as Pinhead , which covered his entire head except for his ears .
Although Taylor found the costume and makeup extremely uncomfortable , he integrated the discomfort into his performance as the sadomasochist .
When he saw his reflection in the mirror in the Pinhead makeup , he said he instantly fell into the character 's mindset .
Taylor thought the makeup menacing enough that he had a minimalist approach to his performance , feeling that attempting to be conventionally frightening would be overacting .
RELEASE AND MARKETING Section::::Release and marketing .
Hellraiser :
Judgment was initially scheduled for a 2017 release .
In July 2016 , Tunnicliffe told Dread Central : " Apart from the couple of images and the casting information that was released , we 've decided to stay tight - lipped now until the film 's release next year .
It seems to me that any images or fodder given out in good faith are kinda twisted around – usually to the negative – so the best response really is the film itself , I suppose .
" He updated the situation in February 2017 , saying that the film was completed : " It 's edited – got sound and music , and it 's all done .
There 's a trailer .
There 's a poster .
It 's not a big Photoshop thing , it 's like a Drew Struzan picture .
But apparently they did see it and think , ' We may do a limited theatrical on it . '
But I do n't know .
They will release it when they see fit . "
Paul T. Taylor gave a possible explanation in October for the delay , saying that the film may not have finished post - production : " I have a reliable source who just informed me that Hellraiser : Judgment has been on a shelf for a while , unfinished .
But now that Harvey Weinstein is out of the picture , Hellraiser : Judgment has been taken off that shelf and is back in post - production .
" Taylor expanded in a later interview , " I wonder if the movie would have ever been released if the women who have come forward to share their stories about Harvey had remained silent .
I think it just was n't a priority for the studio to release it , but now they need all the money they can get .
" The film 's trailer and release date were made public on January 9 , 2018 .
After nearly two years of silence from Dimension Films , Lionsgate Films picked up the distribution rights for Hellraiser : Judgment and Children of the Corn : Runaway ; Judgment was released on digital and home media platforms on February 13 , 2018 .
Lionsgate had obtained the films ' distribution rights from its acquisition of Anchor Bay Entertainment .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Forbes critic Luke Y. Thompson called Judgment the best of the direct - to - video sequels : " That may sound like faint praise , but it is in no way intended as a damnation .
"
Thompson wrote that it integrated the earth and hell scenes more effectively than previous sequels and praised the additional mythology as " the best attempt since the early , more [ Clive ] Barker - infused theatrical films to deliver a coherent cosmology . "
He criticized the suggested retail price of the home - video release , calling it a " must rent " for Hellraiser fans .
Colliders Haleigh Foutch compared Judgment favorably with its direct - to - video predecessors as " a refreshing change of pace .
" Foutch praised the film 's attempt to expand its universe instead of copying what was previously done , but found its execution sloppy due to a low budget and " pedestrian " human drama .
Also praising the special effects and surreal imagery , she wrote that the final product did not live up to its ambitions .
IGN 's William Bibbiani wrote , " Hellraiser :
Judgment is one of the better of straight - to - video Hellraiser sequels , but that says a lot more about how bad those other films are than how good this one is .
The imagery is creepy and the pacing is brisk , but the story is a faded carbon copy of other , better serial killer thrillers , and the new additions to the Hellraiser mythology rob the Cenobites of their deviant allure and otherworldly menace . "
Brad Miska of Bloody Disgusting called it " the most authentic Hellraiser since " : " While sluggish , it at least serves a purpose ...
Everything comes full circle in the final moments , adding an entirely new dimension to the Hellraiser franchise .
Solely for Hellraiser apologists , Judgment does just enough to warrant its existence . "
Steve Barton of Dread Central gave the film a score of 2.8 out of 5 :
" Hellraiser :
Judgment biggest accomplishment is that it 's actually good .
All of the acting is solid , as is the story .
Pinhead is omnipresent , and Taylor delivers a worthy performance and is every bit as majestic as you 'd hope he 'd be ...
While not perfect nor as good as the classic Hellraiser films , [ it ] delivers a rather striking vision that feels as new as it does familiar .
" Giving it two stars out of five , We Got This Covered writer Matt Donato found the police procedural elements generic and the gore and hell elements inadequate ; he called the film " one of the least realized , most throwaway " of the series .
Scott Wampler posted on the Birth .
Movies .
Death website , " The acting 's bad , the story 's half - baked , and Pinhead 's barely in it " , calling the film a " mixed bag with the stuff I enjoyed ultimately outweighed by the stuff I did not " ; however , " I ca n't help but be curious to see what Tunnicliffe might do with a decent budget , or less meddling from the rights holders . "
POSSIBLE SEQUEL
Section::::Possible sequel .
Judgment expands on lore introduced in the earliest films , with Paul Taylor called it a " jumping - off point " for a sequel which " ... could continue the story that it tells because it 's a true Hellraiser script with a beginning , a middle , and a sort of ambiguous end .
And these new characters they introduced could be in future Hellraiser films .
"
Taylor said that he would want to return as Pinhead in a sequel , but would also be happy with a bigger - budgeted reboot starring Doug Bradley .
Tunnicliffe said about Judgments ending , " My attitude is that if he 's the king of the castle , then what hurts Pinhead ?
Taking away his crown .
Maybe if he is bored and it 's become a drudgery , maybe being banished to the earthly realm and then finding his way back would make him more aggressive ; make him come back with a vengeance . "
He said that a Judgment sequel is " purely a question of fan reaction and economics .
"
The director addressed the themes of pain and pleasure in the original 1987 film : "
Honestly , that is the stuff I love the most .
Unfortunately , the people holding the pink slip on the movie really struggle with those elements , I was able to get some pretty strange stuff past them on this one , but the heavy sadomasochistic stuff might have to wait until they have more faith in me .
" Tunnicliffe had no particular idea for a sequel , spin - off , or follow - up of any kind when developing the film : " I have thought about it afterwards , what I think would be great fun .
Maybe a new Cenobite ruler comes in , and this Cenobite 's not doing a great job .
And underhandedly , the Auditor is leaving a trail of breadcrumbs for the guy who is Pinhead to find his way back , and he gets pulled in .
And then it 's like , he turns up , and it 's like a showdown between the newly born Pinhead and this guy who 's taken over his mantle . "
He later said that if such a showdown took place , he would bring back the Cenobites from the original film ( particularly the Female and Butterball Cenobites ) .
Bradley said about returning as Pinhead , " I 'd absolutely be open to doing it again .
I 've never closed the door on the idea .
Right place , right time , right motives , right script .
I 'm pretty relaxed about other actors playing the role .
Since I turned down both movies , it follows that I knew other actors would get to play the part .
Good luck to them .
I do n't know about ' taking over ' : enjoying temporary ownership , maybe . "
Although he was interested in starring in a film version of the Hellraiser novel
The Scarlet Gospels , Bradley said that he was unaware of any plans for such a film .
REFERENCES NOTES EXTERNAL LINKS