DUCKTALES ( 2017 TV SERIES )
DuckTales is an American comedy - adventure animated television series developed by Matt Youngberg and Francisco Angones originally for Disney XD , and then later for Disney Channel .
Produced by Disney Television Animation , the series is a reboot of the original 1987 series of the same name .
DuckTales was officially announced in February 2015 and premiered on August 12 , 2017 with a 44-minute special titled " Woo - oo ! " .
The first season , which resumed on September 23 , 2017 , consisted of 21 further twenty - two minute episodes and a 44-minute season finale special .
Before the series was released , it was renewed for a second season on March 2 , 2017 .
The second season premiered on October 20 , 2018 , and included a Christmas episode under the title " Last Christmas ! " .
On September 21 , 2018 , DuckTales was renewed for a third season .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
After not speaking to each other for ten years , Scrooge McDuck is reunited with his nephew Donald Duck after he asks Scrooge to babysit his three nephews Huey , Dewey , and Louie for the day .
The presence of the newcomers rekindles Scrooge 's sense of adventure , leading the group to go on many new treasure - hunting expeditions .
The nephews and their new friend Webby seek the truth behind their uncles ' strained relationship and the unexplained disappearance of Huey , Dewey , and Louie 's mother and Donald 's twin sister Della Duck .
CAST Section::::Cast .
The show 's main voice cast includes : * David Tennant as Scrooge McDuck * Danny Pudi as Huey Duck * Ben Schwartz as Dewey Duck * Bobby Moynihan as Louie Duck * Kate Micucci as Webby Vanderquack
* Beck Bennett as Launchpad McQuack * Toks Olagundoye as Mrs. Beakley * Tony Anselmo as Donald Duck PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Matt Youngberg and Francisco Angones grew up watching the original series , and had always wanted to develop an updated version for a newer generation .
Youngberg said , " We 're hoping that in thirty years , the kids who watch our show will then be bringing back the next version of DuckTales because they loved what we did so much . "
In May 2015 , Terry McGovern , the original voice of Launchpad McQuack , stated in an interview that the entire voice cast from the original series would not be returning for the reboot , which made him " heartsick " at the news .
The new voice cast for the series was revealed on December 16 , 2016 in a video where they sing an a cappella version of the original theme song in promotion of the news .
The following May , Lin - Manuel Miranda was announced as the voice of Fenton Crackshell - Cabrera / Gizmoduck .
The character was changed to being Latino due to Lin - Manuel 's heritage and because Angones felt that there were not enough positive Latino superheroes .
In June , more cast members , including Tony Anselmo reprising his role as Donald Duck , were announced , and during the 2017 San Diego Comic - Con , Disney announced that Darkwing Duck would also make an appearance in the TV series .
The art style of the show is heavily influenced not just by Carl Barks ' original Uncle Scrooge comics , but also some of Barks ' paintings .
The theme song , written by Mark Mueller for the 1987 series , was re - recorded for the 2017 reboot .
It was arranged by Michael " Smidi " Smithand and TJ Stafford and sung by Felicia Barton .
EPISODES SERIES
OVERVIEW SEASON 1
( 2017–18 ) SEASON 2 ( 2018 )
ONLINE SHORTS Section::::Online shorts .
!
colspan="2
" rowspan="2 " Online shorts !
rowspan="2
" Episodes !
colspan="3
" Originally aired ! scope="col " Series premiere ! scope="col " Series finale
The World 's Longest Deathtrap ! 5 May 27 , 2018 June 24 , 2018 WELCOME TO DUCKBURG !
Section::::Welcome to Duckburg !
Released through the Disney XD YouTube channel ahead of the show 's premiere , these shorts spotlight several characters .
30 THINGS Section::::30 Things .
Recycling an idea used for promotion of the Disney Channel original movie Zombies , these shorts feature the kids listing off thirty things they like .
Concurrent with the show 's move from Disney XD to the Disney Channel , these and all subsequent shorts were released through the Disney Channel YouTube channel .
WEBBY REACTS Section::::Webby Reacts .
These shorts are " reaction videos " featuring Webby watching another Disney Channel show .
THE WORLD 'S LONGEST DEATHTRAP !
Section::::The World 's Longest Deathtrap !
This five - part serial sees Webby and Dewey caught in an incredibly slow - moving deathtrap .
FLY Section::::Fly .
This was a cross promotional short between Disney and electronic music producer Marshmello using his song " Fly " which he had previously released on March 8 , 2018 .
The video was simultaneously aired on Disney Channel and released through Marshmello 's YouTube channel and depicts Scrooge , Donald and the kids traveling through space and encountering an animated Marshmello who fittingly lives on a marshmallow planet .
DEWEY DEW - NIGHT !
Section::::Dewey Dew - Night !
Episodes of Dewey 's home - made " Dewey Dew - Night ! "
talk show , as introduced in the episode " Day of the Only Child ! "
RELEASE BROADCAST
Section::::Release .
Section::::Broadcast .
The 44 minute pilot , titled Woo - oo ! , premiered on August 12 at 12:00 AM and was repeated consecutively for the next 24 hours .
Two days later on August 14 , the pilot was also released on YouTube .
The pilot also aired on Disney Channel on September 17 , 2017 .
The series officially premiered on September 23 , 2017 , coinciding with the original show 's 30th anniversary .
On May 1 , 2018 , the show moved to the Disney Channel , with new episodes airing on Fridays beginning May 4 , 2018 .
In Canada , the pilot premiered on Disney XD on August 12 and the full series started on September 23 , 2017 .
In Australia and New Zealand , the show premiered on Disney Channel on October 13 , 2017 .
In the United Kingdom and Ireland , the pilot premiered on Disney Channel on November 4 , 2017 .
The full series debuted on March 1 , 2018 on Disney XD .
In Indonesia , the show is aired on RCTI from July 8 , 2018 .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
On March 10 , 2017 , a trailer for the series aired on Disney Channel during the premiere of , and on June 14 , 2017 , the title sequence for the series , featuring a re - recording of the theme song written by Mark Mueller and performed by Felicia Barton , was released .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
A DVD titled Woo - oo !
was released on December 19 , 2017 .
The DVD contains the pilot episode and all 6 Welcome to Duckburg shorts .
A second DVD titled Destination Adventure !
was released on June 5 , 2018 .
It contains the episodes The Beagle Birthday Massacre ! , The Living Mummies of Toth - Ra ! , The Impossible Summit of Mt. Neverrest ! , The Spear of Selene !
,
The Missing Links of Moorshire ! , and Beware the B.U.D.D.Y. System ! , as well as 2 episodes of the original 1987 series previously unreleased on DVD ( New Gizmo Kids on the Block and Ducky Mountain High ) .
+ DVD releases !
Region !
Set title !
Seasons !
Aspect ratio !
Episode count !
Release date Woo - oo !
1.78:1 align = center1 December 19 , 2017 Destination Adventure !
1.78:1 , 1.33:1 ( classic series )
align =
center6 June 5 , 2018
RATINGS CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reports an approval rating of 100 % based on 10 reviews , with an average rating of 9.0/10 .
IGN 's Chris Hayner gave the series premiere , Woo - oo ! , a score of 8.5 out of 10 , stating that the reboot " may be aimed at modern young audiences but there 's no denying the heart and adventurous spirit
it gets from the original series . "
Disney comics creator Don Rosa , primarily known for his Uncle Scrooge comic sub - series
The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck , has expressed his dislike of the DuckTales reboot series , claiming that it bears " virtually no resemblance whatsoever " to Barks ' original comics .
PRINTED MEDIA Section::::Printed media .
An ongoing comic series based on the show is being published by IDW Publishing , with Joe Caramagna , Joey Cavalieri and Steve Behling sharing writing duties , and Luca Usai , Gianfranco Florio and others providing the art .
Ducktales # 0 was released on July 19 , 2017 , and # 1 of the monthly series followed on September 27 .
In 2018 , Disney Press published " DuckTales : Solving Mysteries and Rewriting History ! " , a companion book covering the majority of season one , as seen from the perspective of Scrooge , Huey , Dewey , Louie , and Webby .
It is written by Rob Renzetti and one of the shows writers , Rachel Vine .
LIST OF COMICS PUBLISHED Section::::List of comics published .
+ List of comics published ( Prequel ) !
Story code !
Publication in US !
Story name !
Written by !
Artists !
Colorist + List of comics published ( Tie - in ) !
Story code !
Publication in US !
Story name !
Written by !
Artists !
Colorist NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS