THE GOOD FIGHT
The Good Fight is an American legal and political drama web television series produced for CBS 's streaming service CBS All Access .
It is CBS
All Access 's first original scripted series .
The series — created by Robert King , Michelle King , and Phil Alden Robinson — is a spin - off and sequel to The Good Wife , which was created by the Kings .
The first season contains 10 episodes , and premiered on February 19 , 2017 , with the first episode airing on CBS and the following nine episodes on CBS All Access .
The series was initially planned to air in May 2017 , but was moved up after production delays forced CBS to postpone the premiere of the new series .
The series follows Christine Baranski as Diane Lockhart , as she is forced out of Lockhart , Deckler , Gussman , Lee , Lyman , Gilbert - Lurie , Kagan , Tannebaum , & Associates after an enormous financial scam destroys the reputation of her goddaughter Maia ( Rose Leslie ) and Diane 's savings , leading them to join Lucca Quinn ( Cush Jumbo ) at one of Chicago 's preeminent law firms .
The series stars Baranski , Leslie , Jumbo , Erica Tazel , Sarah Steele , Justin Bartha , Delroy Lindo , Nyambi Nyambi , Michael Boatman , and Audra McDonald , and features Paul Guilfoyle and Bernadette Peters in recurring roles .
It is executive produced by Robert King , Michelle King , Ridley Scott , David W. Zucker , Liz Glotzer , Brooke Kennedy and Alison Scott , with Phil Alden Robinson producing and co - writing the first episode .
A second 13-episode season premiered on March 4 , 2018 .
On May 2 , 2018 , the series was renewed for a third season .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
A year after the finale of The Good Wife , an enormous financial scam destroys the reputation of young lawyer Maia and wipes out the savings of her mentor , Diane Lockhart .
The two are forced out of Lockhart , Deckler , Gussman , Lee , Lyman , Gilbert - Lurie , Kagan , Tannebaum , & Associates and join Diane 's former employee Lucca Quinn at Reddick , Boseman , & Kolstad , a prestigious African American – owned firm making waves by taking on Illinois police brutality cases .
In season two , Diane becomes a name partner at the firm , which takes the name Reddick , Boseman & Lockhart .
The show primarily deals with the storylines of its three female leads – Diane , Lucca , and Maia – and contains considerable political and social commentary , exploring topical issues such as the alt - right , the Me Too movement , online harassment , and fake news .
As well as starting again in a new firm with its own office politics to deal with , longtime Democrat Diane must navigate a world she hardly recognizes , becoming increasingly troubled by Trump - era politics and the actions of his administration .
Lucca Quinn , a former employee of Diane 's , has found firm footing at Reddick , Boseman & Lockhart and is a rising star on the partner track , balancing her dedication to her work and a romantic entanglement with US Attorney Colin Morello , a frequent opposing counsel .
Meanwhile Maia , Diane 's goddaughter , is trying to get her legal career off to a good start , while coming under pressure from the FBI over alleged involvement with her father 's Ponzi scheme .
Like The Good Wife , the show makes use of an extensive cast of supporting characters , including a recurring stable of opposing counsel , clients , police officers , FBI agents , judges , and politicians .
Many are played by well - known guest stars .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* Christine Baranski as Diane Lockhart , who loses her savings after an enormous financial scam and joins Reddick , Boseman & Kolstad one of Chicago 's pre - eminent law firms .
In season two , Diane becomes a name partner in the renamed Reddick , Boseman & Lockhart .
* Rose Leslie as Maia Rindell , Diane 's goddaughter , who joins Reddick , Boseman & Lockhart as an associate just after passing the bar exam .
She is Amy 's girlfriend .
* Erica Tazel as Barbara Kolstad ( season 1 ; guest star season 2 ) , a name partner at Reddick , Boseman & Kolstad who leaves the firm at the beginning of the second season .
* Cush Jumbo as Lucca Quinn , an associate who works with Diane and Maia at Reddick , Boseman & Lockhart .
* Delroy Lindo as Adrian Boseman , an attorney who offers Diane a job at his law firm following her financial troubles , and a name partner at Reddick , Boseman & Lockhart .
* Sarah Steele as Marissa Gold , Diane Lockhart 's assistant , who finds she has a knack for investigating .
* Justin Bartha as Colin Morrello , a successful lawyer in the US Attorney 's office and a rival and potential love interest of Lucca .
* Nyambi Nyambi as Jay DiPersia ( season 2 ; recurring season 1 ) , an investigator for Reddick , Boseman & Lockhart .
* Michael Boatman as Julius Cain ( season 2 ; recurring season 1 ) , a managing partner for Reddick , Boseman & Lockhart , and Diane 's former partner at Lockhart / Gardner .
* Audra McDonald as Liz Lawrence ( née Reddick ) ( season 2 ) , a former U.S. Attorney and the ex - wife of name partner Adrian Boseman , who comes to the firm as name partner following her father 's death .
RECURRING
* Paul Guilfoyle as Henry Rindell , Maia 's father , who is a wildly successful financial advisor , phenomenally wealthy and universally loved .
He , Lenore , and Maia are the unofficial First Family of Chicago .
He is arrested for running a giant Ponzi scheme with Diane as one of his victims .
* Bernadette Peters as Lenore Rindell , Maia 's mother who comes from a tough working - class background and is a natively brilliant financial whiz .
She , Henry , and Maia are the unofficial First Family of Chicago .
* Gary Cole as Kurt McVeigh , Diane Lockhart 's estranged husband .
* Zach Grenier as David Lee , a name partner at Diane Lockhart 's former law firm .
* Jerry Adler as Howard Lyman , a geriatric partner at Diane Lockhart 's former firm , and now judge , who shows chauvinistic and stereotyping tendencies .
* Carrie Preston as Elsbeth Tascioni , a quirky yet smart lawyer .
* Heléne Yorke as Amy Breslin , an assistant state attorney and Maia 's girlfriend .
*
Chalia La Tour as Yesha Mancini , an attorney who represented Maia in her legal issues stemming from her father 's arrest .
* Matthew Perry as Mike Kresteva , a lawyer who , after losing the 2012 Illinois gubernatorial election to Peter Florrick , now works for the US Department of Justice , in charge of an investigation encompassing Diane Lockhart and senior staff at Reddick , Boseman & Lockhart .
* Christine Lahti as Andrea Stevens , a high - powered lawyer from Los Angeles who often appears opposite Reddick , Boseman in cases involving film and television * John Benjamin Hickey as Neil Gross , owner of Internet firm Chumhum * Andrea Martin as Francesca Lovatelli , Colin Morello 's mother and a controlling influence in his bid to join Congress * Margo Martindale as Ruth Eastman , consultant for the Democratic National Committee
* Tim Matheson as Tully , a left - wing protester who has a sexual relationship with Diane * Alan Alda as Solomon Waltzer , a renowned lawyer at a national firm who uses dishonest tactics to achieve his aims * Rob McClure as Judge Trig Mullaney , an unintelligent recent Trump appointee to the judiciary with very little understanding of the law GUEST * Greta Lee as Amber Wood - Lutz , a young lawyer at a rival firm whose beaming smile obscures her sneaky tactics in court * Denis O'Hare as Judge Abernathy , a judge whose strong liberal and socialist leanings leads him to overcompensate in favor of conservative litigants * Bebe Neuwirth as Judge Claudia Friend , a no - nonsense judge with a pragmatic approach
* Jane Lynch as Madeline Starkey , a relentless FBI agent with a quirky personal style who believes Maia to be complicit in her father 's scheming * Dylan Baker as Colin Sweeney , a client of the firm and a likely serial killer who has gotten away with many of his crimes
* Becky Ann Baker as Alma Hoff , a principled lawyer at a rival firm * Mamie Gummer as Nancy Crozier , a tough rival trial attorney who charms judges with her sweet - as - pie trial routine * Christian Borle as Carter Schmidt ,
a challenging rival attorney * Kurt Fuller as Judge Dunaway , a stern but fair judge who had little time for Diane 's partners at her old firm * Louis Gossett Jr. as Carl Reddick , a name partner at Reddick , Boseman who has semi - retired .
He dies before season two .
* Jayne Houdyshell as Renee , a friend of Diane 's at a rival firm who cuts ties with Diane after the Rindell scandal * Megan Hilty as Holly Westfall , a ballistics expert and Kurt 's former protégée with whom he had an affair while married to Diane * Nikki M. James as Monica Timmons , a young African American lawyer who sued Diane 's old firm for racial bias in hiring * Jason Biggs as Dylan Stack , a wealthy tech entrepreneur involved in the creation of Bitcoin , wanted by US officials * Kevin Pollak as Judge Kyle Gallo
* Rob Reiner as Judge Josh Brickner
* F. Murray Abraham as Burl Preston , a condescending LA lawyer who mainly represents film studios and the rich and famous * Mike Colter as Lemond Bishop , Chicago 's top drug lord and a kingpin of crime , who retains Diane as his lawyer after he is released from prison * Wallace Shawn as Charles Lester , Lemond Bishop 's terrifying personal lawyer and fixer who is known for making witnesses disappear * Judith Light as Deidre Quinn ,
Lucca 's mother * Obba Babatunde as Danny Quinn , Lucca 's father * Matt Walsh as Judge Oliver Walenstadt EPISODES SEASON 1 ( 2017 ) SEASON 2 ( 2018 ) PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
In February 2016 , Michelle and Robert King , when asked about a spin - off , stated that there was a possibility for a spin - off series .
In May 2016 , CBS was in final negotiations to set up a spin - off featuring Christine Baranski reprising her role as Diane Lockhart , but which would air on CBS All Access instead of the network .
The spin - off was officially ordered to series on May 18 , with Cush Jumbo returning as well .
In September 2016 , it was confirmed that the 10 episode spin - off would premiere in February 2017 , with the story picking up a year after the final episode of the original series and seeing Diane pushed out of her firm after a financial scam involving her mentee wipes out her savings , resulting in her move to Lucca Quinn 's firm .
The series was initially planned to air in May 2017 , but was moved to February 2017 after production delays forced CBS to postpone the premiere of the new series , .
After months of speculation , CBS revealed the title for the spin - off series , which was revealed to be The Good Fight , on October 31 , 2016 .
It was announced that The Good Fight would premiere on February 19 , 2017 .
CBS released the first trailer for the spinoff on December 18 , 2016 , featuring footage from the premiere and later episodes .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
In May 2016 , CBS was in final negotiations with Christine Baranski to reprise her role as Diane Lockhart and Cush Jumbo to reprise her role as well .
After the series was picked up , it was announced that Jumbo would reprise her role as Lucca Quinn .
Deadline announced on September 17 , 2016 that Sarah Steele had been added to the cast , returning as Marissa Gold and appearing as Diane Lockhart 's secretary - turned - investigator .
On October 12 , 2016 , it was announced that former Game of Thrones star Rose Leslie had been cast to play a lead in the show , the role of Diane 's goddaughter Maia who joins Diane 's firm just after passing the bar .
The day after , The Hollywood Reporter announced that Delroy Lindo had been cast as " Robert " Boseman , an attorney who starts poaching Diane 's associates and clients .
The first name of Lindo 's character was changed to " Adrian " .
Deadline reported on October 27 , 2016 that the show had added Paul Guilfoyle and Bernadette Peters for recurring roles as Maia 's parents .
Guilfoyle would play Maia 's father Henry , a wildly successful financial advisor who is phenomenally wealthy and universally loved .
Peters ' character Lenore was described as a woman who came from a tough working - class background and is a natively brilliant financial whiz .
It was announced on October 31 , 2016 that Justified alum Erica Tazel had joined the cast as a series regular .
On November 7 , 2016 , it was announced that Gary Cole would be reprising his role as Diane 's husband Kurt McVeigh .
It was confirmed on November 11 , 2016 , that Zach Grenier , Jerry Adler , and Carrie Preston would be returning as guest stars , reprising their roles of David Lee , Howard Lyman , and Elsbeth Tascioni respectively .
On November 18 , 2016 , it was announced that Justin Bartha had been added as a series regular as Colin , a rising star in the US Attorney 's office and love interest to Lucca .
On August 1 , 2017 , it was announced that Audra McDonald had been added to the main cast for season 2 as Liz Lawrence , reprising her role from The Good Wife season 4 , and that Michael Boatman and Nyambi Nyambi had been promoted to main cast .
On November 7 , 2018 , it was reported that Michael Sheen had joined the main cast for season 3 .
INTERNATIONAL BROADCAST Section::::International broadcast .
On February 8 , 2017 , the series was picked up in Canada by Corus Entertainment to air on their cable channel , W Network ; the U.S. broadcast premiere of the series would be simulcast by Corus ' broadcast system Global .
On March 2 , 2017 , Channel 4 confirmed it had acquired the UK broadcast rights for the series for its More4 channel following the success of progenitor series The Good Wife on that same channel .
The series debuted on More4 on March 30 , 2017 .
HBO Europe and HBO Nordic began streaming all 10 episodes of the first season on June 1 , 2017 , in Bulgaria , Croatia , the Czech Republic , Hungary , Macedonia , Poland , Serbia , Slovakia , Slovenia , Sweden , Denmark , Norway and Finland , while India 's Zee Entertainment Enterprises took exclusive pay - TV rights to The Good Fight for its English - language general entertainment channel Zee Café , which was also the Indian home of The Good Wife .
In Australia , SBS picked up the series which premiered on August 2 , 2017 .
In Southeast Asia , the series broadcasts on Star World but later moved to Fox Life starting from the second season .
In Greece the series first aired on Cosmote TV beginning in December 2017 .
In Ireland , the series is aired on RTÉ2 beginning July 2018 .
In Germany , the series airs on Fox Channel .
The first season began airing in November 2017 ; the second began airing in June 2018 .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The Good Fight has received positive reviews .
Rotten Tomatoes awarded the series with a rating of 98 % based on reviews from 51 critics and an average rating of 8.2 out of 10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads : " An auspicious beginning for CBS
All Access
, The Good Fight solidly follows its predecessor while allowing for new storytelling styles , a wider narrative scope , and a chance for its lead to explore new territory with a relatable human struggle . "
On Metacritic , the series received a score of 80 based on reviews from 25 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
The Los Angeles Times suggested that Good Fight creators Robert and Michelle King " still had the Good Wife magic " and though Good Wife " had already [ run ] its course " after seasons 6 and 7 had received mediocre reviews , " they just needed a clean slate " to allow them to continue to mine more stories from that fictional universe .
In addition , unlike Good Wife which was centered around " romantic tension " and got bogged down in Alicia Florrick 's ( Julianne Margulies ) love life , Good Fight was considered " refreshing for steering the story the other way " as relationships are "
not the plot points that drive the story " .
Good Fight is regarded as a rare successful example of a TV series spin - off , as other contemporary TV series are either reboots or remakes .
Writing for Vox.com , Todd VanDerWerff praised the show 's deft use of political themes , commenting that while The Good Wife was a commentary on " liberal hypocrisy " and the nature of moral compromise , The Good Fight stands out as a much more earnest " defence of liberal values " , giving the show a compelling " reason to exist " .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
width= "
" Year ! width=
" " Award ! width=
" " Category ! width= " " Nominee(s ) ! width= " " Result ! width= "
" Ref Primetime Emmy Awards Jonathan Coulton TCA Awards
The Good Fight
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS