LAS VEGAS STADIUM
Las Vegas Stadium is the working name for a domed stadium under construction in Paradise , Nevada for the Las Vegas Raiders of the National Football League ( NFL ) and the UNLV Rebels football team of the University of Nevada , Las Vegas ( UNLV ) .
It is located on about 62 acres west of Mandalay Bay at Russell Road and Hacienda Avenue and between Polaris Avenue and Dean Martin Drive , just west of Interstate 15 .
Construction of the $ 1.8 billion stadium began in September 2017 and is expected to be completed in time for the 2020 NFL season .
HISTORY 2016 Section::::History .
Section::::2016 .
In January 2016 , reports emerged that Las Vegas Sands was considering developing a stadium in conjunction with Majestic Realty and UNLV , on a 42-acre site on Tropicana Avenue owned by UNLV .
UNLV had been in the market for a new stadium to replace Sam Boyd Stadium since at least 2011 .
Raiders owner Mark Davis visited Las Vegas on January 29 to tour the site and meet with Sands chairman Sheldon Adelson and other local figures .
The Raiders , who had been trying to get a new stadium built for the team since the 1980s , had just missed out on relocating to Los Angeles that same month and were at an impasse in Oakland .
In order for the team to relocate to Las Vegas , a new stadium was required , since Sam Boyd Stadium was undersized for the NFL and there were no other professional - caliber stadiums in Nevada .
On March 21 , 2016 , when asked about Las Vegas , Davis said , " I think the Raiders like the Las Vegas plan , " and " it 's a very very very intriguing and exciting plan . "
Davis also met with Nevada Governor Brian Sandoval about the stadium plan .
On April 1 , 2016 , Davis met with UNLV officials and toured Sam Boyd Stadium to evaluate whether it could serve as a temporary home for the team .
On April 28 , 2016 , Davis said he wanted to move the Raiders to Las Vegas and pledged $ 500 million toward the construction of the proposed $ 2.4-billion domed stadium .
"
Together we can turn the Silver State into the silver and black state , " Davis said .
In the spring of 2016 , the board of directors of Las Vegas Sands rejected Adelson 's stadium proposal .
Adelson decided to move ahead with the stadium as an individual investment , pledging $ 650 million of his personal wealth to the project .
The viability of the Tropicana Avenue site was called into serious question in June 2016 , when Southwest Airlines objected to the location because its proximity to the northern end of one of McCarran Airport 's runways could negatively affect the safety and capacity of air traffic at the airport .
The list of potential locations soon expanded to nine candidates , including the sites of the Wild Wild West casino , the Wynn golf course , the Riviera casino , the Las Vegas Festival Grounds , and Cashman Center .
By September , the list was narrowed to two possibilities : the Bali Hai Golf Club , south of Mandalay Bay , and a vacant lot on Russell Road , just west of Interstate 15 .
On August 25 , 2016 , the Raiders filed a trademark application for " Las Vegas Raiders " on the same day renderings of a proposed stadium design were released .
On September 15 , 2016 , the Southern Nevada Tourism Infrastructure Committee unanimously voted to recommend and approve $ 750 million for the Las Vegas stadium plan .
Majestic Realty revealed in October 2016 that it had withdrawn from the stadium project .
Sandoval called a special session of the Nevada Legislature to consider the stadium and other tourism - related proposals in October 2016 .
The funding bill for the stadium was approved by a 16–5 vote in the Senate and by 28–13 in the Assembly , and was signed into law by Sandoval on October 17 .
The bill allowed Clark County to increase its hotel tax to raise the $ 750 million in funding .
2017
Section::::2017 .
The Raiders filed relocation papers on January 19 to move from Oakland to Las Vegas .
On January 26 , 2017 , the Raiders submitted a proposed lease agreement for the stadium .
It was reported that the Raiders had selected the Russell Road site as the stadium location , the team would pay one dollar in rent , and that they could control the naming rights for both the stadium and plaza and in addition keep signage sponsorship revenue .
Days after the Raiders ' announced proposal , Adelson dropped out of the stadium project , pulling his proposed $ 650 million contribution Shortly after this announcement , Goldman Sachs , which had planned to finance part of the project , withdrew as well .
As a result , the Raiders were expected to increase their contribution from $ 500 million to $ 1.15 billion .
On March 6 , the Raiders revealed Bank of America would lend $ 650 million to replace the Adelson portion of the funding .
NFL owners voted to approve the move by a margin of 31–1 on March 27 .
The next day , the Raiders and the Las Vegas Stadium Authority began accepting deposits for season tickets for the new stadium .
The Raiders announced that they planned to remain in Oakland until the stadium was complete .
The Raiders closed the purchase of the land for the stadium at the Russell Road site on May 1 .
The purchase price was reported at $ 77.5 million .
On May 11 , it was announced that in a joint venture Mortenson Construction and McCarthy Construction would be the developers for the stadium .
Mortenson previously worked on U.S. Bank Stadium in Minneapolis .
The stadium authority approved a stadium lease with the Raiders on May 18 .
The lease was to be for 30 years with four successive extension options of five years each .
On September 18 , construction activity began on the stadium site with site preparation .
A groundbreaking ceremony was held on November 13 .
The ceremony featured NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell , Raiders owner Mark Davis , his mother Carol Davis ,
various Raiders legends including Howie Long , Jim Plunkett , Tom Flores , and Ray Guy , Las Vegas and Nevada politicians such as Governor Brian Sandoval , Las Vegas Mayor Carolyn Goodman , Clark County Commissioner Steve Sisolak and
stadium authority head Steve Hill .
The event was hosted by George Lopez and included other celebrities like Carlos Santana , longtime Vegas icon Wayne Newton , and Howie D. and Nick Carter of the Backstreet Boys .
There was also a tribute to the victims of the 2017 Las Vegas shooting that happened nearby with Judith Hill and the Las Vegas House of Blues Gospel Choir performing ' Rise up ' while 58 beams of light symbolizing the 58 victims were lit .
2018
Section::::2018 .
In January , construction crews began blasting caliche rock with dynamite to excavate and create the stadium bowl .
On February 3 , the Raiders opened a 7,500-square - foot stadium preview center at Town Square , located a few miles from the stadium site , featuring interactive exhibits and team memorabilia , with plans for simulations of views from individual seats and a large - scale stadium model .
On August 27 , Clark County changed the stadium 's address from 5617 Dean Martin Drive to 3333 Al Davis Way .
FINANCING
Section::::Financing .
The budget for development of the stadium is estimated at $ 1.8 billion .
Of this , $ 78 million was spent to purchase the land , $ 1.33 billion is estimated to be spent on construction , $ 123 million on furniture , fixtures , and equipment , $ 234 million on design and engineering , and $ 31 million on utilities and infrastructure .
Some reports gave a budget of $ 1.9 billion , which also included $ 100 million to build a separate Raiders practice facility .
The financing for the project is expected to come in the form of $ 750 million in public funding and $ 1.1 billion from the Raiders .
The public portion of the funding will come from municipal bonds issued by Clark County , backed by the proceeds of a special tax on hotel rooms in the Las Vegas area , which took effect in March 2017 .
The Raiders ' contribution was expected to include a $ 650 million loan from Bank of America , $ 200 million from the NFL 's stadium loan program , and $ 300 million from sales of personal seat licenses at the stadium , naming rights for the stadium , and sponsorships .
Local government can not receive any rent or revenue sharing from the stadium , because such an arrangement would not be compatible with the tax - exempt status of the bonds .
Proponents instead argued that the public financing would be justified by increased economic activity and tax revenue related to the stadium .
Critics have argued that the economic projections were based on overly optimistic assumptions .
A total of $ 645 million in construction bonds sold out in 90 minutes in April 2018 , representing Clark County 's contribution to the project beyond room taxes already collected .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
For Las Vegas Stadium , Mark Davis retained the same architecture firm , MANICA Architecture , that had designed the previously proposed Carson Stadium near Los Angeles .
Davis retained much of the look from the Carson stadium because he " fell in love with the overall design of it " .
The stadium will be a 10 level domed stadium with a clear ETFE roof , silver and black exterior and large retractable curtain - like side windows facing the Las Vegas Strip .
The design includes a large torch in one end that will house a flame in honor of Al Davis , the late long - time owner of the Raiders .
Updated renderings released after the relocation vote passed show the stadium with a roll - in natural grass field similar to the one at State Farm Stadium in Glendale , Arizona .
In an August 17 , 2017 Las Vegas Stadium Authority meeting it was revealed that the stadium will have a designated pickup / drop off loop for ride sharing services such as Uber and Lyft , a first for a stadium in the NFL .
TENANTS AND EVENTS Section::::Tenants and events .
The stadium will replace Sam Boyd Stadium and will serve as the home of both the Raiders and the UNLV Rebels football program .
In addition , it will host the annual Las Vegas Bowl .
Stadium backers project 20 to 25 additional events per year , with plausible possibilities including the Super Bowl , the Pro Bowl , the NFL Draft , the NCAA Final Four , the USA Sevens rugby tournament , the Monster Jam World Finals , boxing matches , Ultimate Fighting Championship events , the Pac-12 Football Championship Game , neutral - site college football games , international soccer matches , concerts , and corporate shows .
David Beckham visited Las Vegas in 2016 to advocate for the stadium as a possible home for his Major League Soccer expansion team , although he ultimately announced the launch of the team with a stadium in Miami .
The stadium was submitted as a potential site for the 2026 FIFA World Cup , but was later withdrawn from consideration .
SEE ALSO
* Las Vegas Ballpark
* Sports in the Las Vegas metropolitan area * T - Mobile Arena * Oakland Raiders relocation to Las Vegas
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Proposed Las Vegas Stadium Virtual Tour from the National Football League ( NFL ) 's official YouTube channel * Construction page for stadium from Mortenson McCarthy * Las Vegas Stadium Authority * Stadium webcam