THE SHIP OF THE DEAD
The Ship of Dead is a young - adult fantasy novel based on Norse mythology written by American author Rick Riordan .
It is the third and final novel in the Magnus Chase and the Gods of Asgard trilogy , preceded by The Hammer of Thor .
It was released on October 3 , 2017 by Disney - Hyperion , an imprint of Disney Book Group .
The novel is narrated in the first - person view by Magnus Chase , 16-year - old demigod and homeless orphan .
He and his crew sail to the farthest borders of Jotunheim and Niflheim in pursuit of Asgard 's greatest threat .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
Magnus Chase receives an ocean survival lesson from Percy Jackson , a Greek demigod who is his cousin Annabeth Chase 's boyfriend .
The latter advises him , mentioning the possessiveness of sea gods over their weapons .
Alex Fierro and Magnus travel to the Chase Mansion , where they recover notes scribbled by Randolph at different points of time .
Alex feels that these notes hold the key to defeat Loki .
After reaching Valhalla , Magnus summons a ship gifted by his father Frey .
Mallory Keen , Halfborn Gunderson , Thomas Jefferson Jr. , Samirah Al Abbas and Alex accompany Magnus , while they plan to pick Blitzen and Hearthstone along the way .
The crew 's talk is heard by the Nine Billow Maidens , who take them to the court of Aegir , where they discover Hearth and Blitz are held prisoner .
Aegir 's eldest daughter realizes Magnus ' identity , from his previous encounter with her mother Ran .
Magnus swears by his troth to defeat Loki in a flyting contest and to avenge Aegir 's humiliation , but the crew is nevertheless attacked .
They escape with the help of Magnus ' grandfather Njord .
Njord instructs them and tells Magnus that the only way to defeat Loki is by drinking Kvasir 's mead .
The crew continue on their journey , with Blitz and Hearth travelling separately to retrieve Bolverk 's whetstone .
As the crew heads to York , the backstories of the members are revealed .
Mallory died disarming a bomb in Ireland ; Halfborn died near Jorvik ; TJ died after accepting a hopeless challenge , a trait inherited from his father Tyr .
Samirah fasts during the Ramadan season .
The crew arrives at Old York , where they duel with the giant Hrungnir for the location of Kvasir 's Mead .
They get the information that they need that the Kvasir Mead is in Jorvik or Norway .
Magnus later has a word battle with Loki and wins due to which Loki reduces to the size of a nut and is imprisoned in a walnut given by Frigg ; Mallory 's mother and the queen of Asgard .
Magnus and their friends meet their godly parents who congratulate them for defeating Loki and delaying the Ragnarok for which he is rewarded with a boon from Lord Odin .
Magnus asks Odin to lend him his lawyers so that he could convert his mansion to an orphanage and home for the homeless .
He later calls Annabeth and tells her his adventure and notices her , sobbing .
CHARACTERS
* Magnus Chase ( Beantown ) -
A 16-year - old son of Frey who dies in the first few chapters but becomes an einherjar .
He is Annabeth Chase 's cousin , but last saw her when he was very young .
He has healing and regeneration powers , resistance to extreme temperatures , and other magical abilities .
As a human , he was asthmatic and weak , but gains extreme strength and endurance after his death .
* Samirah Al - Abbas ( Sam ) - The Valkyrie who brought Magnus to Hotel Valhalla .
A daughter of Loki , she emigrated from Iraq with her family and is descended from a medieval Arab traveler and historian who wrote an important account about living among the Vikings .
She is stripped of her powers as a Valkyrie as a result of her choice to make Magnus an einherjar , but is reinstated by Odin himself .
She is a practicing Muslim .
She is a shapeshifter and carries an ax and a green hijab , which doubles as a camouflage cloak .
She is engaged to Amir Fadlan , who works in a falafel shop .
* Hearthstone ( Hearth ) -
A friend of Magnus .
He is an alf ( elf ) .
He is deaf - mute , but speaks Alf Sign Language and can read lips .
He had an abusive childhood , with parents who disliked him because of his disabilities .
In exchange for working for Mimir , he received the ability to work rune magic .
* Blitzen ( Blitz ) -
Another friend of Magnus , a svartalf ( dwarf ) .
He is the son of Freya .
He and Hearth watched over Magnus while he was living in the streets .
Blitz 's father was killed by Fenris when he was a child , after an attempt to replace the Fenris Wolf 's bindings .
Blitz is unskilled at crafting ( unusual for dwarves ) but is a master fashion advisor .
He , like Hearth , once worked for Mimir .
* Mallory Audrey Keen ( Mack ) -
Mallory Keen was born in Belfast , Ireland to Frigg and an unnamed man .
Mallory had a poor relationship with her father due to his alcoholism .
On 21 July 1972 , which later became known as Bloody Friday , Loki disguised himself as one of Mallory 's friends and tricked her into installing a car bomb on a school bus , claiming that soldiers were onboard instead of children .
Her mother , Frigg , knowing Mallory would die , appeared to her disguised as an old hag and convinced her to disarm the bomb , giving her two knives .
The car bomb blew up , killing Mallory , but since she died a heroic death with a weapon in her hand , she was taken to Valhalla .
* Halfborn Gunderson
* Alex Fierro -Alex 's family is influential , which first attracted Loki 's attention , causing him to seduce Alex 's father in the form of a " voluptuous red - head " .
Nine months later , Loki left him with a child .
The family did n't take the news well , especially after Loki permanently " opened their eyes " and made them aware of the Nine Worlds and the Norse gods .
Alex spent her / his life being resented for her / his Norse heritage and for her / his gender fluidity , which was thought to be Loki 's fault .
Only her / his grandfather accepted her / him for who she /
he was , and taught her / him how to make pottery .
About two years before becoming an einherji , Alex became homeless and began to wander the streets of Boston .
At some point in life , he / she lived in a youth shelter on Winter Street in Boston , at roughly the same time when Magnus was there .
He /
She remembers hating the place .
* Thomas Jefferson Jr. -Thomas Jefferson 's son DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Rick Riordan announced The Ship of the Dead on the same day of the release of The Hammer of Thor , the second book of the Magnus Chase and the Gods of Asgard trilogy .
According to him , this would be the last book in the series .
An iTunes preview containing the first three chapters of the book was released on September 16 , 2017 .
The cover , illustrated by John Rocco , was released on April 26 , 2017 , and a trailer was published on YouTube on October 2 , 2017 .
To promote The Ship of the Dead , Riordan went on a nine - day tour around the United States beginning on October 3 , 2017 .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The Ship of the Dead was released in the United States by Disney - Hyperion on October 3 , 2017 .
An audiobook , narrated by Michael Crouch , was published on the same date by Books on Tape .
The book also received e - book and paperback versions , and has been translated into 11 languages to date .
The Ship of the Dead sold over 57,000 copies during the first week .
By the end of 2017 , it sold over 219,000 copies .
Upon release , the book ranked 2 on USA Todays bestseller list and was considered one of the best books of the year by Barnes & Noble .
It also won the Goodreads Choice Award for Middle Grade & Children 's of 2017 .
REFERENCES