MINE ( 2016 FILM )
Mine is a 2016 psychological thriller film co - written and co - directed by Fabio Guaglione and Fabio Resinaro , in their feature film directorial debut .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot Summary .
In North Africa , US Marine sniper Mike Stevens and his spotter Tommy Madison are on a secret mission to assassinate a dangerous terrorist leader attending a Bedouin wedding .
Mike botches the assassination attempt , hesitating when the target 's son steps in the way .
Due to a glare off the sniper scope , Mike and Tommy are discovered by the enemy and attacked .
However , a sandstorm forces the enemy to retreat , leaving Mike and Tommy behind .
Seeking an immediate evacuation , the two are instructed to find their way to a village where they can be picked up once the sandstorm stops .
However , en route to the village , Tommy steps on a land mine which blows off his legs .
Moments later , Mike also steps on a mine , but realizes he has done so and avoids stepping off it .
Madison , in agony , shoots himself in the head , not wanting to return home to his wife and child in his current condition .
Now alone , Mike contacts his superior via transmitter , who tells him that he will have to hold out for another fifty - two hours before he can be saved .
Exposed to the harsh environment of the desert , Stevens battles both the psychological and physical tolls of the treacherous situation he is trapped in , recalling memories or imagining appearances of his girlfriend , Jenny , and his parents , Bob and Rosa , and moments from when he was a young boy .
Mike is visited several times by the Berber , who long ago lost one of his legs as well as his only daughter to a landmine he had intended to take and sell to enemy soldiers .
The Berber , who speaks some English , urges Mike to step off the mine and move forward with life .
He insists that Mike is a lucky man , after surviving a night attack by desert dogs while simultaneously managing to keep his foot on the mine .
Mike is later attacked by enemy insurgents , who had traced him to his current location , but is able to fight them off .
Mike then reluctantly decides to accept the Berber 's advice , having grown weary of his predicament .
He steps off the landmine – only for it not to explode .
He digs and discovers that what he had assumed to be an explosive was actually just a tin can with a little toy soldier inside of it .
He sets off a flare and is finally rescued .
He is next seen back in the United States , reuniting with Jenny , to whom he finally proposes .
CAST * Armie Hammer as Mike * Annabelle Wallis as Jenny
* Tom Cullen as Tommy * Clint Dyer as the Berber * Geoff Bell as Mike 's Father ( Bob ) * Juliet Aubrey as Mike 's Mother ( Rosa )
* Inés Píñar Mille as Berber 's child * Luka Peros as Delta Force Soldier * Daniel Sandoval as Little Mike * Agustín Rodríguez as Sayid Assif
* Yesarela Azurmendi as Bedouin Bride * Manuel Medero as Bedouin Groom * David Traylor as Major ( voice ) * Edoardo Purgatori as Com .
Operator ( voice )
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
In 2012 , Fabio Guaglione and Fabio Resinaro pitched to Peter Safran the scriptment for Mine .
Armie Hammer joined the cast of the film on April 30 , 2014 .
Guaglione was at first against Hammer 's casting , because of his previous " charming " roles and once said to producer Peter Safran that " if [ Armie Hammer ] stars , the movie 's dead " .
However , Safran convinced him by telling him of Hammer 's collaborations with famous directors such as David Fincher , Clint Eastwood , and Guy Ritchie , and organizing a meeting with the actor .
For the role of US Marine Tommy Madison , Guaglione and Resinaro considered over 50 American actors , including Rami Malek , Adam Brody and Chris Zylka , before choosing British actor Tom Cullen .
The movie was shot in Fuerteventura in the Canary Islands .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Mine was released in Italy on 6 October 2016 by Eagle Pictures .
It was released on April 7 , 2017 in the United States by Well Go USA Entertainment , and in United Kingdom by Universal Pictures .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 15 % based on 27 reviews , and an average rating of 3.9/10 .
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 40 out of 100 , based on 10 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
In Europe , the film received more positive reviews .
According to aggregator Mymovies.it , Mine was rated 3.20 stars out of 5 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS