SPIDER - MAN :
FAR FROM HOME
Spider - Man :
Far From Home is an upcoming American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics character Spider - Man , produced by Columbia Pictures and Marvel Studios , and distributed by Sony Pictures Releasing .
It is set to be the sequel to ( 2017 ) and the twenty - third film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe ( MCU ) .
The film is directed by Jon Watts , written by Chris McKenna and Erik Sommers , and stars Tom Holland as Peter Parker / Spider - Man , alongside Michael Keaton , Jon Favreau , Zendaya , Marisa Tomei , Jake Gyllenhaal , Cobie Smulders , and Samuel L. Jackson .
It follows Parker and his friends as they go on summer vacation to Europe .
By October 2016 , discussions had begun for a sequel to Spider - Man : Homecoming , with a release date given to the film before the end of the year .
Holland was confirmed to return in July 2017 , with Watts also confirmed to return to direct that December , and Gyllenhaal cast as Mysterio in June 2018 .
Holland revealed the film 's title as Spider - Man : Far From Home ahead of filming , which began in July 2018 .
Filming took place in England , the Czech Republic , Venice , and New York City , before wrapping in October 2018 .
Spider - Man :
Far From Home is scheduled to be released on July 5 , 2019 , in the United States .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
After the events of , Peter Parker goes on summer vacation to Europe with his friends .
While abroad , he teams up with Mysterio to battle the Elementals .
CAST
* Tom Holland as Peter Parker / Spider - Man : A teenager who received spider - like abilities after being bitten by a genetically - modified spider .
* Michael Keaton as Adrian Toomes
/ Vulture : An incarcerated salvager - turned - arms trafficker who uses a suit with mechanical wings forged from Chitauri technology .
* Jon Favreau as Harold " Happy " Hogan : The former head of security for Stark Industries and Tony Stark 's driver and bodyguard who looks after Parker .
* Zendaya as Michelle " MJ " Jones : One of Parker 's classmates .
* Marisa Tomei as May Parker : Peter 's aunt .
* Jake Gyllenhaal as Quentin Beck
/ Mysterio :
An expert on the Elementals who is recruited by Nick Fury to help Spider - Man stop them .
* Cobie Smulders as Maria Hill : A former high ranking S.H.I.E.L.D. agent who works closely with Nick Fury .
* Samuel L. Jackson as Nick Fury :
The former director of S.H.I.E.L.D. Section::::Cast .
Additionally , Jacob Batalon , Tony Revolori , Angourie Rice , and Hemky Madera reprise their roles as Parker 's best friend Ned , Parker 's rival Eugene " Flash " Thompson , Parker 's classmate Betty Brant , and Mr. Delmar , the owner of a local bodega , respectively .
Numan Acar has been cast as Dimitri , while J. B. Smoove , Oli Hill , and Remy Hii have been cast in undisclosed roles .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
In June 2016 , Sony Pictures chairman Tom Rothman stated that Sony and Marvel Studios were committed to making future Spider - Man films after ( 2017 ) .
The following month , Marvel Studios president Kevin Feige said if additional films were made , the company had an early idea to follow the model of the Harry Potter film series , and have the plot of each film cover a new school year , with a second film intended to take place during Peter Parker 's junior year of high school .
By October 2016 , discussions had begun for a second film , including which villain would be featured , according to Spider - Man actor Tom Holland , who was signed for three Spider - Man films including Homecoming .
In December , after the successful release of the first Homecoming trailer , Sony slated a sequel to the film for July 5 , 2019 .
Sony 's insistence that the sequel be released in 2019 complicated Marvel 's preference for secrecy regarding their plans for Spider - Man , since the character would die at the end of ( 2018 ) , and not be resurrected before the release of in April 2019 .
Sony was revealed in June 2017 to have the use of another Marvel Studios - controlled character for the film , as it did with Iron Man for Homecoming .
Feige stated that Marvel and Sony were " just starting to solidify our plans " for the film , and felt Spider - Man 's appearances in Avengers : Infinity War and Avengers : Endgame would " launch him off into a very new cinematic universe at that point " , similar to how ( 2016 ) " informed everything in Homecoming " .
Marvel and Sony were both keen on having Homecoming director Jon Watts return for the sequel , with Feige saying " that 's the intention for sure " and Pascal noting they " would be crazy [ not to ]
" have him return .
Watts also noted he was signed for two films .
Additionally , Feige mentioned the film would be titled in a similar fashion to Homecoming , using a subtitle , and would not feature " 2 " in the title .
He also stated that filming was expected to begin in April or May 2018 .
Pascal said the film would begin " a few minutes " after the conclusion of Avengers : Endgame .
As with Homecoming , Feige stated that the film 's villain would be one that had not yet been seen in film .
By July 2017 , Watts was in negotiations with the studios to return for the sequel , and Marisa Tomei expressed interest in reprising her role as Aunt May from the previous film .
PRE - PRODUCTION Section::::Pre - production .
At the end of August 2017 , as the film was entering pre - production , Chris McKenna and Erik Sommers , two of the writers on Homecoming , were in final negotiations to return for the sequel .
In early October 2017 , Jacob Batalon confirmed he would reprise his role of Ned in the film .
In December 2017 , Feige confirmed that Watts was returning to direct the sequel .
By February 2018 , Zendaya was slated to return for the film , reprising her role as Michelle " MJ " Jones .
By late April , filming was scheduled to begin in early July 2018 , with Feige saying filming would occur in London , instead of Atlanta as with the first film .
Feige explained that one of the reasons behind this was because a majority of the film would be spent around the world , outside New York City .
A month later , Jake Gyllenhaal entered negotiations to play Mysterio , while Tomei and Michael Keaton were confirmed to reprise their respective roles of May and Adrian Toomes / Vulture ; McKenna and Sommers were also confirmed as the film 's screenwriters .
At the end of June 2018 , Holland revealed the film 's title to be Spider - Man : Far From Home , and the casting of Gyllenhaal was confirmed .
Feige explained that they decided to reveal the title in this way because of the potential for the title to leak after filming began .
He compared the title to Spider - Man : Homecoming in that it is " full of alternate meaning " while continuing the use of " Home " , and explained that the film focuses on Parker and his friends going to Europe on summer vacation , away from their home of New York .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography began on location in Hertfordshire , England on July 2 , 2018 , under the working title Fall of George .
Filming also took place in London , with filming locations including East London .
Shortly after the start of filming , set photos revealed Hemky Madera would reprise his role as Mr. Delmar , the owner of a local bodega , and J.B. Smoove and Numan Acar joined the cast .
By early August , Samuel L. Jackson and Cobie Smulders were confirmed to be appearing in the film , reprising their respective roles of Nick Fury and Maria Hill from previous MCU films , and Remy Hii joined the cast later in the month .
Filming took place in Prague and Liberec in the Czech Republic in September , and moved to Venice by the end of the month .
Filming moved to New York City in early October , before officially wrapping on October 16 , 2018 .
POST - PRODUCTION Section::::Post - production .
At Sony 's CCXP Brazil panel in December 2018 , it was revealed that Hydro - Man and the Elementals would appear in the film .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Spider - Man : Homecoming composer Michael Giacchino was confirmed to return to score Far From Home in October 2018 .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
Due to the events of Avengers : Infinity War and Avengers :
Endgame , Germain Lussier of io9 noted that Sony would either have to begin marketing this film only two months before its release or spoil the fact that Parker is resurrected for general audiences that may not realize that this would happen in the next Avengers film .
Lussier suggested that the latter approach be taken , while a representative of Sony said that the studio would be working with Marvel to " figure out the Spider - Man strategy " .
The first trailer for Spider - Man : Far From Home was shown at Sony 's CCXP Brazil panel on December 8 , 2018 , with Holland and Gyllenhaal in attendance to promote the film .
The footage did not acknowledge the events of Infinity War or Endgame , with Steven Weintraub of Collider describing it as a continuation of " the Spider - Man universe " only .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Spider - Man :
Far From Home is scheduled to be released in the United States on July 5 , 2019 .
FUTURE Section::::Future .
A potential third film would occur during Parker 's senior year of high school .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS