FOAL IMMUNODEFICIENCY SYNDROME Foal immunodeficiency syndrome ( FIS ) , originally known as Fell pony syndrome , mainly affects two breeds of ponies : the Fell and Dales .
FIS is a recessive genetic disease .
Affected foals appear normal at birth , but become weak , and either die or are euthanized by three months of age due to persistent infections caused by immunodeficiency .
SYMPTOMS Section::::Symptoms .
Affected foals are healthy when born .
By one month of age , foals become depressed , lose weight , and have diarrhea , and a cough with nasal discharge .
The diarrhea and cough initially improve in response to treatment , but then worsen as treatment becomes ineffective .
The foal 's coat becomes dry and staring and the foal weakens further by two months of age as the foal fails to suckle , and by the age of 3 months , the foal dies ( or is euthanized ) , giving this disease a 100 % mortality rate .
GENETICS Section::::Genetics .
FIS is a recessive genetic disease ; affected foals are homozygous for the affected gene , that is , they have two copies of the gene , one inherited copy inherited from each parent .
For this to occur , both parents must be carriers of the gene .
In 2010 , 39 % of Fell ponies and 18 % of Dales ponies tested prior to breeding carried the affected gene .
The mutation is also found in approximately 9 % of US and European Gypsy horses .
A single nucleotide polymorphism ( mutation ) , in the sodium / myo - inositol cotransporter ( SLC5A3 ) gene causes FIS .
This gene is crucial in regulating a cell 's response to osmotic stress ; an alteration to the function of the gene leads to failure of red blood cell production ( erythropoiesis ) and failure of the immune system .
DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT Section::::Diagnosis and treatment .
Genetic testing will diagnose whether the foal has FIS .
There is no effective treatment for the infections that the foal develops ; euthanasia is the preferred option .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The disease was first reported in 1996 .
The first cases were found in Fell ponies , and the disease was initially termed " Fell pony syndrome .
"
The disease appeared to have a genetic component , and , after hereditary diseases known to affect other horse breeds were investigated , it was concluded that this was a newly identified disease .
The cause of disease was tracked down using a genome - wide association study , which implicated a region on horse chromosome 25 .
This chromosome was sequenced in five affected horses , and in 2009 , a mutation was discovered in the SLC5A3 gene .
Shortly after this , a genetic test was launched for horse owners to identify whether their ponies were carriers .
OUTLOOK Section::::Outlook .
For the affected Fell and Dales pony breeds , genetic testing of ponies prior to mating can ensure that carriers are never mated together , which will prevent affected foals from being born .
Over time , the frequency of the disease gene will decrease , without having an adverse impact on the genetic variation of the pony population .
SEE ALSO
* Severe combined immunodeficiency ( non - human ) REFERENCES