MORE LIFE More Life is a commercial mixtape by Canadian rapper Drake .
Described and marketed as a playlist , some publications have referred to it as a mixtape .
It was released on March 18 , 2017 , by Cash Money Records , OVO Sound , Republic Records and Young Money Entertainment .
Production of More Life was handled by a variety of record producers , including 40 , Frank Dukes , Boi-1da , Murda Beatz , T - Minus , Nineteen85 and Kanye West , among others .
An ensemble of guest vocalists also appear , including Young Thug , Giggs , Skepta , Quavo , Travis Scott , 2 Chainz , Kanye West , Jorja Smith , Sampha and PartyNextDoor .
The songs on More Life feature a broad range of genres , including hip hop , R&B , dancehall , grime , trap , Afrobeat , and pop .
The mixtape was supported by five singles : " Fake Love " , " Passionfruit " , " Free Smoke " , " Portland " and " Glow " .
More Life received generally positive reviews and debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 , becoming his seventh consecutive number one album , while also breaking several streaming records .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
Following the project 's announcement , Drake described More Life as " a body of work [ he 's ] creating to bridge the gap between [ any ] major releases " .
He further commented on the project during an interview with Complex , detailing his intention to " [ create ] a playlist to give you a collection of songs that become the soundtrack to your life " .
More Life was subject to many speculative release dates , with it initially set for December 2016 .
However , it was pushed back to January after Drake suffered an ankle injury on the Summer Sixteen Tour .
Further dates were also rumored up until the official announcement in March 2017 of the project 's release .
More Life borrows its name from a Jamaican slang phrase to wish someone well , popularized by dancehall artist Vybz Kartel , whom Drake has called one of his " biggest inspirations " for his own dancehall - inflected sound .
The last song on the record , " Do Not Disturb " mentions " Club Palazzo in the Bridge " .
This is a reference to a now defunct nightclub in the northwest Toronto suburb of Woodbridge , Ontario .
ARTWORK Section::::Artwork .
The cover art of the project features a photo of Drake 's father , Dennis Graham , taken in the 1970s .
The photo is surrounded by a black border with the subtitle " A Playlist By October Firm " written below the photo .
The original version of the cover art released in October 2016 on Drake 's Instagram did not feature the black border or subtitle .
PROMOTION
Section::::Promotion .
More Life was preceded by three singles : " Fake Love " , " Sneakin ' " featuring 21 Savage , and " Two Birds , One Stone " .
The songs premiered on October 23 , 2016 , during Drake 's thirtieth birthday edition of OVO Sound Radio .
The episode also housed Drake 's collaboration with Dave on " Wanna Know ( Remix ) " . " Fake Love " , " Sneakin " and " Two Birds , One Stone " were all released as commercial singles six days later , however , " Fake Love " was the sole track that remained on More Life .
Drake further previewed two additional songs on February 17 , 2017 , during appearances at the Paper Soho Club in London .
On March 11 , he announced the release date as March 18 , via commercials released through Instagram .
It initially premiered on the 39th episode of OVO Sound Radio at 6:30 pm .
EST .
SINGLES Section::::Singles .
The mixtape 's lead single , " Fake Love " , was released for digital download on October 29 , 2016 .
The song was produced by Vinylz and Frank Dukes .
The song peaked at number eight on the US Billboard Hot 100 .
The mixtape 's second single , " Passionfruit " , was released to rhythmic contemporary radio on March 28 , 2017 .
The song was produced by Nana Rogues .
The song peaked at number eight on the US Billboard Hot 100 .
The mixtape 's third single , " Free Smoke " , was released to rhythmic contemporary radio on April 18 , 2017 .
The song was produced by Boi-1da , with additional production by Allen Ritter , while the additional music by Akira Woodgrain .
The song peaked at number 18 on the US Billboard Hot 100 .
The mixtape 's fourth single , " Portland " , was released to rhythmic contemporary radio on May 16 , 2017 .
The song features guest appearances from American rappers Quavo and Travis Scott , while the production was handled by Murda Beatz , with co - production by Cubeatz .
The song peaked at number nine on the US Billboard Hot 100 .
The mixtape 's fifth single , " Glow " , was released to urban contemporary radio on June 6 , 2017 .
The song features a guest appearance from American rapper Kanye West , while the production was handled by 40 and Kanye West himself , with additional production by Noah Goldstein .
The song peaked at number 54 on the US Billboard Hot 100 .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
More Life received generally positive reviews from critics .
At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications , the mixtape received an average score of 79 , based on 25 reviews .
Dan Weiss of Consequence of Sound said , " The singing and melodies are massaged with a care unheard in the prior Drake discography ; this album flows as improbably as The Life of Pablo , with more assured lyrics and smoother sequencing , to offset the lack of a certifiable genius at the helm . "
Erin Lowers of Exclaim !
said , " Excluding its minor gaffes , More Life cements a place for genres long - overlooked by mainstream media ; dancehall , grime , Afrobeat , house , trap and , of course , rap , and takes Toronto on a world tour to celebrate life — More life . "
David Turner of The Guardian said , " Even if the album lacks the humor of the Views songs " 9 " or " Childs Play"—no line here bests " Why you got ta fight with me at Cheesecake /
You know I love to go there"—the breadth of styles
recalls his 2012–2015 SoundCloud that found space for both Fetty Wap and James Blake remixes .
" Clayton Purdom of The A.V. Club said , " More Life is light , often weightless .
Despite its playlist tag , it is unmistakably a Drake album — it even has a Blueprint highball closer like each of its predecessors — and as an album , it is probably Drake 's worst .
But as a collection of totally atomized songs and ideas , it 's up there with anything he 's released . "
Preezy of XXL said , " While fans and critics argue over whether or not he 's one of the greatest MCs of his generation , let alone among the greatest of all - time , Drake continues to prove his worth as an elite talent with More Life , another blockbuster from rap 's golden child with the midas touch . "
Andy Gill of The Independent said , " Pleasingly , two of the best [ guests ] are British , Sampha capping " 4422 " with an emotive outburst , and Skepta getting an entire " Skepta Interlude " to himself to muse about how he " died and came back as Fela Kuti " .
Elsewhere , the likes of Giggs , Young Thug and 2 Chainz add furtive but menacing sketches of thug life to tracks like " No Long Talk " and " Sacrifices " ,
the latter offering Drake 's most elegant mea culpa for past transgressions . "
Jayson Greene of Pitchfork said , " The more voices he lets into the frame , the fuller and richer the results , and More Life bursts with energy and lush sounds — more guests , more genres , more producers , more life .
It is as confident , relaxed , and appealing as he 's sounded in a couple of years .
"
Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone said , " More Life is his finest longform collection in years , cheerfully indulgent at 22 tracks and 82 minutes , a masterful tour of all the grooves in his head , from U.K. grime ( " No Long Talk " ) to Caribbean dancehall ( " Blem " ) to South African house ( " Get It Together " ) to Earth , Wind & Fire ( " Glow " ) .
Yet the more expansive he gets , the more himself he sounds — and the further he roams around the globe , the deeper he taps into the heart of Drakeness .
" Scott Glaysher of HipHopDX said , " Other than the Yeezy collab " Glow " being a bit lackluster , primarily for being slow and sonically off - putting , More Life has very few stumbles and a plethora of exciting moments that will ensure this project 's shelf life . "
Kitty Empire of The Observer said , " By definition , More Life has sprawl in - built , so judicious use of the skip function is required , but this is high - quality filler . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Publication !
Accolade !
Rank ! class="unsortable " COMMERCIAL PERFORMANCE Section::::Commercial performance .
Worldwide , on the day of its release , More Life broke streaming records on both Spotify and Apple Music .
The tracks of the album achieved a total of 61.3 million streams on Spotify in a single day , breaking the previous record of 56.7 million for ÷ by Ed Sheeran , in early March 2017 .
On Apple Music , the tracks of the album achieved a total of 89.9 million streams on the day of release ( not including the number of listeners during the OVO Sound Radio debut of the album on Beats 1 ) , setting the record of most streams of an album in a single day on Apple Music , as well as any single streaming service , and beating Spotify 's number by almost 30 million streams .
On the chart dated April 8 , More Life topped the US Billboard 200 and set a streaming record , earning 505,000 album - equivalent units , of which 226,000 were pure sales .
By the end of 2017 , More Life had accumulated 2,227,000 album - equivalent units in the United States , with 363,000 being pure sales .
TRACK LISTING
Section::::Track listing .
Credits were adapted from the mixtape 's liner notes .
Notes * signifies a co - producer * signifies an additional producer * signifies an additional music contribution * " Free Smoke " and " Gyalchester " features additional vocals by Baka Not Nice
* " Passionfruit " features additional vocals by Moodymann and Zoë Kravitz
* " Jorja Interlude " features vocals by Jorja Smith
* " Madiba Riddim " features outro vocals by 4YallEntertainment * " Blem " features uncredited outro vocals by Lionel Richie and Lil Wayne
* " 4422 " originally did n't feature credited vocals by Sampha * " Skepta Interlude " features vocals by Skepta * " Do Not Disturb " features background vocals by Snoh Aalegra *
" Get It Together " features uncredited outro vocals by Burna Boy Sample credits
* " Free Smoke " contains a sample of " Roll Up " , written by Marvin Bernard , Bryan Antoine and Daniel Sewell , performed by Tony Yayo featuring Danny Brown ; and excerpts from " Building a Ladder " , written by Paul Bender , Simon Mavin , Perrin Moss and Naomi Saalfield , performed by Hiatus Kaiyote .
* " Jorja Interlude " contains an interpolation of " Doing It Wrong " , written by Aubrey Graham , Noah Shebib and Don McLean , performed by Drake .
* " Get It Together " contains uncredited reworked elements of " Superman " , written by Nkosinathi Maphumulo and Busisiwe Nqwiliso , performed by Black Coffee featuring Bucie .
* " Blem " contains an interpolation of " All Night Long " , written and performed by Lionel Richie .
* " Teenage Fever " contains elements of " If You Had My Love " , written by Rodney Jerkins , Fred Jerkins III , LaShawn Daniels and Cory Rooney , performed by Jennifer Lopez .
* " KMT " contains a sample of Sonic the Hedgehogs " His World " ; and " Shutdown " , performed by Skepta .
* " Glow " contains a sample of " Devotion " , written by Philip Bailey and Maurice White , performed by Earth , Wind & Fire ; excerpts from " 6 8 " , written and performed by Gabriel Garzón - Montano ; and excerpts from " Jungle " , written by Aubrey Graham , Noah Shebib and Kenza Samir , performed by Drake .
*
" Since Way Back " contains a sample of " Clipped Wings " , written by Robert Sylvester Kelly and Warryn Campbell , performed by R. Kelly .
* " Do Not Disturb " contains an uncredited sample of " Time " , written and performed by Snoh Aalegra .
* " Get It Together " contains an uncredited sample of " More Life " , written and performed by Burna Boy .
CHARTS WEEKLY CHARTS
Section::::Charts .
Section::::Weekly charts . ! scope="col " Chart ( 2017 ) ! scope="col " Peak position !
scope="row " Australian Urban Albums ( ARIA ) ! scope="row " Slovak Albums ( ČNS IFPI ) ! scope="row " Spanish Albums ( PROMUSICAE ) ! scope="row " Swedish Albums ( Sverigetopplistan ) YEAR - END CHARTS Section::::Year - end charts . ! scope="col " Chart ( 2017 ) ! scope="col " Position ! scope="row " Australian Albums ( ARIA ) ! scope="row " Belgian Albums ( Ultratop Flanders ) ! scope="row " Canadian Albums ( Billboard ) ! scope="row " Danish Albums ( Hitlisten ) ! scope="row " Dutch Albums ( MegaCharts ) ! scope="row " French Albums ( SNEP ) ! scope="row " Italian Albums ( FIMI ) ! scope="row " New Zealand Albums ( RMNZ ) ! scope="row " Swedish Albums ( Sverigetopplistan ) ! scope="row " UK Albums ( OCC ) ! scope="row " US Billboard 200 ! scope="row " US Top R&B /
Hip - Hop Albums ( Billboard ) ! scope="col " Chart ( 2018 ) ! scope="col
" Position !
scope="row " Canadian Albums ( Billboard ) ! scope="row " New Zealand Albums ( RMNZ ) ! scope="row " US Billboard 200 CERTIFICATIONS REFERENCES