GHOST GUN
A ghost gun is a firearm without serial numbers .
The term is used by gun control advocates , gun rights advocates , law enforcement , and some in the firearm industry .
By making the gun themselves , owners may legally bypass background checks and registration regulations .
Under U.S. federal law , the creation and possession of ghost guns is permitted , but a license is required to manufacture firearms for sale or distribution .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The lower receiver , which in the United States is the only part legally considered a " gun " ( other components may be unregulated ) , can be completed from an " 80 % receiver " , one which is 80 % completed before being sold legally without background or identity checks .
The remaining 20 % of the work may then be done using common drill press or Dremel machine tools or available hand tools .
Companies sell kits including drill bits , stencils , and jigs to aid the process , but some proficiency with the equipment may be required .
More recently it has been possible to produce the receiver from scratch using plastic or more durable metal in a 3D printer , though the variety of materials and methods can create challenges in ensuring the resulting receiver is suitable for use .
More recently Defense Distributed introduced a CNC mill called the " Ghost Gunner " which is optimized for the purpose of carving the lower receiver from an aluminum unfinished receiver .
Some ghost guns are AR-15 style firearms .
AR-15s are modular firearms and the serial number is applied to the lower receiver , which holds the trigger group .
Once an individual has an AR-15 lower receiver , they can assemble a complete weapon using widely available components , such as barrels , stocks , magazines , and upper receivers .
Other ghost guns include pistols and AK-47 style semi - automatic rifles .
The Philippines is a center of ghost gun production , especially .45 caliber semi - automatic pistols .
POLITICAL ISSUES Section::::Political issues .
Due to their lack of serial numbers , tracing ghost guns used in crimes is much harder than tracing serialized weapons .
There are no manufacturer or sales records to check .
The difficulty means local law enforcement officers often do not even attempt traces of ghost guns .
California , especially Sacramento , has been a hub of ghost gun production .
The ATF speculated in 2014 that there are tens of thousands of ghost guns in California alone .
Four noted crimes in California were committed with ghost guns : a murder - suicide involving college students in Walnut Creek , a shootout between hostage - taking bank robbers and Stockton police officers , a mass shooting at Santa Monica College in 2013 by a student who was prohibited from owning a gun , and a shooting spree at Rancho Tehama Reserve in 2017 by a man who was served a restraining order that barred him from possessing guns .
Proponents of ghost guns include gun rights activists and anarchists .
They say that making weapons is the right of every American which maintains the privacy of gun owners .
Individuals have organized " build parties " where equipment and expertise are shared to help create ghost guns .
Advocates say that ghost guns are used in crime rarely despite widespread ownership .
Gun rights advocates and law enforcement say that , because of the cost and effort needed to create ghost guns , criminals are more likely to use commercial weapons instead .
Two U.S. shipping companies , Federal Express and United Parcel Service , have refused to transport Ghost Gunner branded computer numerical control ( CNC )
milling machines .
LEGAL ISSUES UNITED STATES FEDERAL LAW Section::::Legal issues .
Section::::United States federal law .
Under U.S. federal law owning a ghost gun is allowed , assuming that no other impediments exist .
The U.S. Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco , Firearms and Explosives ( ATF ) officials characterize this as a loophole .
The U.S. State Department has sued to take computer files to control 3D - printers off the internet under the grounds their publication constituted export of a munition under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations .
With a legal case pending United States Supreme Court action , Defense Distributed removed the files , but the censored blueprints remain accessible via The Pirate Bay 's " Physibles " section .
The U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) reported in 2013 that it had seized hundreds of ghost guns , including a machine gun , and unregistered silencers .
The FBI does not generally track the use of homemade firearms .
ATF agents say that ghost guns are sold at a $ 1,000 premium due to being untraceable .
According to the FBI , the popularity of ghost guns grew following the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting in 2012 , which sparked fears of new gun control measures .
In a 2014 raid of Ares Armor , the Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco , and Firearms confiscated 6,000 receiver blanks which they said were too close to finished units .
After a lawsuit , all but 18 of the seized guns were returned and placed for sale to purchasers in 47 states .
In a similar case , EG Armory of California was raided , but agreed to forfeit 3800 lower receivers without admission of any wrongdoing .
In Sacramento the owner of C&G Tool Inc. pled guilty to illegal manufacture of firearms .
Prosecutors argued that he " advertised his shop as a place where people could make guns in 20 minutes by pressing a few buttons on a computerized machine " , rejecting his position that buyers created their own guns .
CALIFORNIA STATE LAW Section::::California state law .
In 2014 , California attempted to enact a law to require serial numbers on unfinished receivers and all other firearms , including antique guns , but it was vetoed by the governor .
However , in 2016 , it passed a measure requiring anyone planning to build a homemade firearm to obtain a serial number from the state ( de facto registration ) and pass a background check .
NEW YORK STATE LAW Section::::New York State law .
In 2015 , during the state of New York 's first prosecution for sale of ghost guns , Attorney General Eric Schneiderman said it is " easy " for " criminals to make completely untraceable , military - grade firearms . "
FURTHER READING * Beyer , Katherine E. Busting the Ghost Guns A Technical , Statutory , and Practical Approach to the 3-D Printed Weapon Problem 103
Ky. L.J. 433 ( 2014–2015 ) SEE
ALSO
*
3D printed firearms
*
Right to keep and bear arms * Gun control
* Gun politics in the United States * Improvised firearm
* List of notable 3D printed weapons and parts REFERENCES