SKAM ( TV SERIES ) Skam (; ) is a Norwegian teen drama web series about the daily life of teenagers at the Hartvig Nissen School , a gymnasium in the wealthy borough of Frogner in West End Oslo .
It was produced by NRK P3 , which is part of the Norwegian government - owned NRK .
Skam follows a new main character each season .
While airing , a new clip , conversation or social media post was published in real - time on the NRK website on a daily basis .
Each season has focus on particular topics , ranging from relationship difficulties , identity , eating disorders , sexual assault , homosexuality , mental health issues , religion , and forbidden love .
Despite no promotion ahead of its 2015 launch , Skam broke viewership records .
Its premiere episode is among the most - watched episodes in NRK 's history , and by the middle of season two , it was responsible for half of NRK 's traffic .
With season three , it broke all streaming records in Norway , along with viewership records in neighbouring countries Denmark and Sweden , and attracted an active international fanbase on social media , where fans promoted translations to aid in understanding .
The show repeatedly made international headlines for its popularity surge across the world , and the show 's actors became famous worldwide .
However , the international popularity was not expected , with the music industry requiring geoblocking of NRK 's website due to music license contracts only supporting the Norwegian public .
The series ended after its fourth season in 2017 , reportedly due to high production stress .
Skam received critical acclaim and significant recognition for its portrayal of sexual abuse in the second season and homosexuality in the third .
The series was also praised for its contributions to promote Norwegian language and culture internationally , as well as for its unique distribution format , adopting a new strategy of real - time , high - engagement , snippet - based distribution rather than rigidity and television schedules .
It received multiple Norwegian awards throughout its run , being honored for its dramatic narrative , innovative storytelling format , writing , directing , and actors ' performances .
The success of the series has spawned an American version led by Skam showrunner Julie Andem , as well as multiple European remakes , four books containing original scripts , and blooper reels .
HARTVIG NISSEN SCHOOL Section::::Hartvig Nissen School .
The series focuses on the daily life of teenagers at the Hartvig Nissen School
( Hartvig Nissens skole ) , a prestigious gymnasium ( preparatory high school ) located in the Frogner borough in Oslo 's West End , with the address Niels Juels gate ( Niels Juel Street ) 56 .
The school is informally and widely known simply as " Nissen . "
Originally named Nissen 's Girls ' School , it was founded by Hartvig Nissen in 1849 as a private girls ' school which was owned by its headmasters and which served the higher bourgeoisie .
It is the second oldest gymnasium in Oslo and is widely considered one of the country 's most prestigious ; its alumni include many famous individuals and two members of the Norwegian royal family .
The school was the first higher school in Norway which admitted women .
CONCEPT
Section::::Concept .
At the start of a week , a clip , conversation or social media post is posted on the Skam website .
New material is posted on a daily basis , with the content unified and combined into one full episode on Fridays .
The main character differs from season to season , and the fictional characters have social media profiles where viewers can follow their activities .
The show allows public interaction over the duration of the episode .
CHARACTERS Section::::Characters .
The following are characters in Skam . ! !
scope="col " rowspan="2 " Character ! scope="col " rowspan="2 " Portrayed by ! scope="col " colspan="9 " class="unsortable
" Seasons ! scope="col " 1 ! scope="col " 2 ! scope="col " 3 ! scope="col " 4 ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " In season one , David Alexander Sjøholt was credited as playing a character called David , though his name was never spoken in the show .
This could be the character Magnus or Sjøholt was playing a different student .
Sjøholt also makes an uncredited appearance in the last episode of season two .
In season three , Mikael appears uncredited in a video Isak finds on the Internet of Even .
In the final episode of season four , the main character changes between each clip .
Vilde , Penetrator - Chris , Jonas , Chris , Even and William each have a clip where they are the main character .
Eskild and Linn have one clip together .
MAIN CAST
* Lisa Teige as Eva Kviig Mohn ( born June 2 , 1999 ) is the main character in the first season .
When we first meet Eva , she recently started dating Jonas , who just ended a relationship with Eva 's best friend Ingrid .
Her relationship with Jonas is complicated and she finds it hard to trust him , eventually leading her to cheat on him and ultimately leading to their breakup at the end of season one .
Eva lives at home with a busy mom and starts at the Hartvig Nissen school ( " Nissen " ) in 2015 together with her friends and former classmates Jonas , Ingrid , Sara and Isak .
Losing her former best friends Ingrid and Sara due to her relationship to Jonas , she starts up new friendships with Noora , Chris , Vilde and Sana at Nissen .
After season one , Eva is mostly portrayed as an outgoing and promiscuous party - girl .
* Josefine Frida Pettersen as Noora Amalie Sætre ( born April 6 , 1999 ) is the main character in the second season .
Noora is portrayed as a confident , smart and helpful character in seasons one and two .
In the second season , it is however revealed that she has some insecurities after all .
She lives with two roommates and does not have contact with her parents .
Unlike her friends Eva , Chris and Vilde , Noora is not into drinking or hooking with guys .
When the school 's playboy William continues to flirt with her despite several rejections , she eventually gets interested in him , but due to her prejudices against him , she finds it hard to accept .
They end up in a relationship at the end of season two .
In seasons three and four , Noora is portrayed a little bit more naive and restless , as she faces complications in her relationship with William .
* Tarjei Sandvik Moe as Isak Valtersen ( born June 21 , 1999 ) is the main character in the third season .
Isak is a close friend of both Eva and Jonas in season one .
At the end of the season , Noora and Eva find homosexual pornography on Isak 's phone , raising suspicions about his sexual orientation .
Season three follows Isak 's struggles to accept his sexuality .
He meets Even , and the two quickly fall in love and begin to secretly see each other .
However , Isak unknowingly pushes Even ( who has bipolar disorder ) away by revealing that he does n't want to be around people with mental disorders , due to his traumatizing experiences with his mentally ill mother .
After struggling with his feelings for Even , Isak decides to come out to his best friend Jonas , and eventually to other people that he is close to .
He gets back together with Even with the aid of his friends , but after Even has a manic episode , he distances himself from him again out of fear and heartbreak .
However , he comes to better understand Even 's situation after a discussion with his friends , and reunites with Even after he realizes that he loves him , accepting the obstacles created by his disorder .
In season four , Isak is portrayed as much happier , as he lives comfortably and publicly in a relationship with Even .
* Iman Meskini as Sana Bakkoush ( born December 24 , 1999 ) is the main character in the fourth season .
Sana 's biggest struggle throughout the series is to live the traditional Muslim lifestyle and the traditional Norwegian gymnasium - lifetyle at the same time .
Sana is portrayed as decisive and eloquent , but faces constant prejudices from her classmates , her parents and people she meets on the street , which sometimes leads Sana to take irrational decisions .
This peaks when Sana anonymously cyberbullies her classmate Sara , who wants to exclude Sana from their russefeiring - squad .
Unlike Eva , Noora and Isak , she has a close relationship with her family .
In season 4 , she falls in love with Yousef , who she initially thinks is a Muslim , but turns out not to be .
After initial attempts to distance herself from him , they appear to grow closer later in the season .
RECURRING CAST
* Marlon Valdés Langeland as Jonas Noah Vasquez ( born December 20 , 1999 ) , Eva 's boyfriend in the first season .
He is also Isak 's best friend and a classmate of all the main characters .
* Thomas Hayes as William Magnusson ( born January 10 , 1997 ) , the flirt and eventually boyfriend of Noora in the second season .
He is also classmate and best friend of Penetrator - Chris .
* Henrik Holm as Even Bech Næsheim ( born February 12 , 1997 ) , the love affair and eventual boyfriend of Isak .
Even is diagnosed with bipolar disorder at some point prior to season 3 .
* Ulrikke Falch as Vilde Hellerud Lien ( born July 13 , 1999 ) , the naive fourth member of the main girl squad .
She is the enthusiastic initiator of russefeiring , revy and other social events for the squad .
* Ina Svenningdal as Christina " Chris " Berg ( born January 6 , 1999 ) , the amusing fifth member of the girl squad .
She usually avoids most conflicts and emotionally deep conversations .
* Herman Tømmeraas as Christoffer " Penetrator - Chris " Schistad ( born March 21 , 1997 ) , the on - and - off love interest of Eva through all four seasons .
He is two years older than the main cast , but also studies at Nissen in the first two seasons .
* David Alexander Sjøholt as Magnus Fossbakken ( born October 30 , 1999 ) , Isak 's awkward friend and classmate .
In the fourth season he is in a relationship with Vilde .
* Carl Martin Eggesbø as Eskild Tryggvason ( born August 19 , 1995 ) , the stereotypically homosexual roommate of Noora in season two and four , and of Isak 's in season three .
* Simo Mohamed Elhbabi as Elias Bakkoush ( born March 5 , 1997 ) , Sana 's brother and Even 's former classmate .
* Cengiz Al as Yousef Acar ( born September 21 , 1997 ) , the atheist love interest of Sana .
Yousef is also Elias 's best friend and former classmate .
* Cecilie Martinsen as Ingrid Theis Gaupseth ( born February 23 , 1999 ) , Jonas 's girlfriend and Eva 's best friend prior to season one .
Ingrid is a member of the russefeiring - squad " Pepsi Max " , which often rivals the main characters squad .
* Kristina Ødegaard as Sara Nørstelien ( born July 12 , 1999 ) , Ingrid 's best friend and leader of the " Pepsi Max " squad .
Sara dates Isak in the second season .
* Rakel Øfsti Nesje as Linn Larsen Hansen ( born January 1 , 1996 ) , the introverted roommate of Eskild and Noora / Isak .
EPISODES
OVERVIEW SEASON 1
Section::::Episodes .
Section::::Season 1 .
The first clip from season 1 was made available on Tuesday , 22 September 2015 , with the combined clips during the week premiering as a full episode on Friday , 25 September 2015 .
The season consists of 11 episodes ; the main character is Eva Mohn .
The storyline deals with Eva 's difficult relationship with her boyfriend Jonas and the themes of loneliness , identity , belonging and friendship .
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
The first clip from season 2 was made available on Monday , 29 February 2016 , with the combined clips during the week premiering as a full episode on Friday , 4 March 2016 .
The season consists of 12 episodes ; the main character is Noora Amalie Sætre .
The season is about her relationship with William and deals with issues of friendship , feminism , eating disorder , self - image , violence , sexual violence and the contemporaneous refugee crisis in relation to Norwegian democracy .
SEASON 3
Section::::Season 3 .
The first clip from season 3 was made available on Sunday , 2 October 2016 , with the combined clips during the week premiering as a full episode on Friday , 7 October 2016 .
The season consists of 10 episodes ; the main character is Isak Valtersen .
The season deals with Isak 's burgeoning relationship with Even Bech Næsheim and is principally a coming out story that deals with issues of love , sexual identity , authenticity , mental illness , religion and friendship .
* NRK TV and NRK P3 used different titles for 7 of the season 3 episodes .
SEASON 4 Section::::Season 4 .
The first clip from season 4 was made available on Monday , 10 April 2017 , with the combined clips during the week premiering as a full episode on Friday , 14 April 2017 .
The season consisted of 10 episodes , and the main character is Sana Bakkoush .
The season deals with the Islamic religion , forbidden love , cyberbullying , friendship , and the Norwegian russ celebratory period .
The series finale episode switches character clip - to - clip , focusing on short stories by characters not given their own , full season .
The episode deals with parental depression , love rejection , jealousy , friendship , mutual relationship support , and fear of abandonment .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Julie Andem created Skam .
In an interview with Rushprint in April 2016 , Andem discussed production of the series .
Originally developed for 16-year - old girls , Andem made use of the " NABC " production model ( " Needs / Approach / Benefit / Competition " ) , and instead of collecting information from a vast amount of sources , she had extensive , hours - long interviews with a single representative to uncover what needs that specific target audience had in order to cover that story .
In contrast to American shows , which were the primary competition for shows attracting attention from teenagers , Andem stated that she had one advantage ; knowing who the audience were and what culture they grew up in .
One major area of exploration
Andem found through research was pressure ; she stated that " the pressure to perform is very high for this target audience .
They strive to perform in so many ways .
That 's fine , and it does n't necessarily have to be dangerous or unhealthy .
But what is unhealthy is that many feel like they ca n't live up to the demands , and therefore feel that they failed .
They are comparing themselves to each other , not themselves .
And then a thought occurred : How to get them to let go of the pressure through a series like Skam " .
Andem wanted the show to be a combination of social realism , soap opera , and sitcom , transitioning between the genres as the scenes switch , for example from the comical scenes of a doctor 's office to the make - out scenes on the stairs .
She admitted it did n't always work , saying that one particular scene change in episode 5 of season 1 from the stairs to the doctor 's office was " a dramatic jump " , and elaborated that " in a later scene , I told the photographer that we maybe should try to go a little closer .
But we did n't get the humor , so :
fuckit , we 'll shoot sitcom - ish and blend the genres . "
Andem created nine characters , without any backstory .
Everyone was supposed to be able to lead a season , and the show was going to switch character season - to - season .
1,200 people auditioned for the roles in the first round of casting .
As production started , Andem wrote scripts for the shows , and there was no improvisation .
" A lot of people think much of the show is improvised .
It 's not .
A lot is written for the actors .
And before and after a scene , I 'll wait for a while before I say thank you and let them play a little in the scene .
If a scene does n't work , we 'll fix it and see what in the script does n't work .
" Production had a short deadline , with scripts written in three days , one - and - a - half days to shoot , and four - to - five days to edit .
" The plan must be there , and we just have to finish through " .
The series ' use of real - time was planned from early on , and Andem wrote the series in episodic format , although the content also had to work for daily releases , including a cliffhanger ending in each scene .
Andem read the comments for each day , and looked for feedback from the audience on how to end each season while still keeping her original plans in some way .
As the series premiered , there was little or no promotion for the show , due to the production 's and NRK 's wish for teenagers to find it on their own , spread the news through social media , and avoid the older generation even noticing the series .
There were no launch interviews , no reviews , and the actors were shielded from the media , with NRK P3 editorial chief Håkon Moslet saying that " We want most of the focus to be on the show .
These actors are very young , I think it 's good they 're being shielded a little .
They do also notice the popularity of the series " .
The Norwegian newspaper Dagbladet reported in December 2016 that the production of seasons 2 and 3 of Skam had cost a combined sum of NOK10 million .
NRK P3 editorial chief Håkon Moslet stated : " For being a drama of high quality , Skam is a very cost - efficient production . "
In December 2016 , the series was renewed for a fourth season .
In early April 2017 , it was announced that the first clip from the fourth season would premiere on 10 April , and that it would be the last season of the series .
NRK P3 editorial chief Håkon Moslet stated that the making of Skam had been " an extreme sport " , and in an Instagram post , creator , writer and director Julie Andem wrote that " Skam has been a 24/7 job .
It has also been amazingly fun to work on , and I really believe that has given the series a unique energy , and ensured that Skam continues to surprise and entertain .
We recently decided that we wo n't be making a new season this fall .
I know many of you out there will be upset and disappointed to hear this , but I 'm confident this is the right decision . "
On 23 June 2017 , one day before the series finale , the entire cast officially met the press before the series ' wrap party , answering questions from fans around the world and describing their experiences and memories from production .
It was notably the first time all the actors were allowed to break their silence and speak to the public .
On 9 December 2018 , NRK published the first of four official blooper reels from the series .
The 9 December release featured never - before - seen content from the first season , with the remaining three blooper videos released throughout the following week .
FRANCHISE
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Franchise .
Section::::Adaptations .
In December 2016 , Simon Fuller 's XIX Entertainment production company signed a deal with NRK to produce an American version of the series , then - titled Shame .
Development of the series continued in the following months , with a title change to SKAM Austin , casting calls taking place , and the announcement that Austin would air on Facebook 's " Facebook Watch " original video platform .
It premiered in April 2018 , and has been renewed for a second season .
In April 2017 , the Danish theatre Aveny - T was reported to have acquired exclusive rights to produce a stage version of Skam .
Four different performances will be made , one for each season , with the first show having taken place in Copenhagen on 15 September 2017 , and the remaining three performances produced once a year through the year 2020 .
In September 2017 , French entertainment website AlloCiné reported on the imminent production of a French remake of the series .
In October 2017 , Variety and The Hollywood Reporter reported that local adaptations of Skam would be produced in five European countries ; Germany , France , Italy , Spain and the Netherlands .
NRK CEO Thor Gjermund Eriksen said in a statement that " We are very excited about the tremendous interest that Skam / Shame has generated outside of Norway .
The creators of Skam aimed to help 16-year - old - girls strengthen their self - esteem through dismantling taboos , making them aware of interpersonal mechanisms and showing them the benefits of confronting their fears .
This is a vision we are proud to bring to other countries " .
Variety notes that each local production will be required to do its own local research into the dilemmas and dreams of its teenagers , rather than copying the original Norwegian production .
In October 2018 , Belgium began airing its own adaptation .
Having achieved success , multiple remakes have been renewed for additional seasons , progressing in development at different speeds .
COUNTERPARTS BOOKS Section::::Books .
In September 2018 , Julie Andem announced on her Instagram account that , in coordination with Norwegian book publishing company Armada Forlag , four Skam books , one for each season of the series , would be released to the public , including original , unedited manuscripts , featuring scenes that were never filmed , lines that were later cut , as well as Andem 's personal comments and thoughts .
The first book , focusing on season one , was made available for purchase on the day of the announcement , on Monday , 3 September 2018 .
In the press release from Armada Forlag , Andem said that " Releasing these unedited scripts , including typos and nerd comments , is right at the edge of my comfort zone " , while adding that " I hope people think it 's fun to read the scripts , and that maybe someone gets inspired to write themselves " .
Jonas Forsang , chairman of Armada Forlag , said that " This is not just TV - history , this is major literature " .
Norwegian press company Aftenposten noted at the time that the timeline for the release of the three remaining books was unclear .
A few days later , Andem signed a book contract with Swedish publishing company Salomonsson Agency , which included rights for the agency to distribute the Skam books outside of Norway .
CEO Julia Angelin told Verdens Gang that " We are incredibly proud to be working with the genius Julie Andem .
She has changed the entire Scandinavian culture " , and added that " It will be incredibly fun to build her career as an author with this unique project .
We have only seen the beginning " .
The report from Verdens Gang also stated that the first book had been sold " at record tempo " since its release just three days earlier , and that all four Skam books will be released before the 2018 Christmas holiday period .
Andem told the publication that " The Skam fans are , as I 've expressed before , " the coolest fanbase on earth " .
And they are always very enthusiastic and thankful .
That is nice and moving " .
A later update to the same article clarified that the book had " already " been distributed to Finland and Sweden , without details of further distribution .
Website Books From Norway , which provides English - language information on Norwegian literature , states that rights for international book release have also been sold to Denmark through the Høst & Søn agency , Italy through the Giunti agency , Poland through the Rebis agency , and Russia through the Popcorn Books agency , though the website does n't specify release dates .
DISTRIBUTION Section::::Distribution .
In Norway , the series is available on the radio channel NRK P3 's website , and on the web television solution NRK TV .
The weekly episodes are also aired on Fridays on TV channel NRK3 .
The series has been licensed to air as a Nordvision co - production by public service broadcasters in other Nordic countries , specifically : *
In Denmark , the series is shown by DR on the DR TV streaming service and aired on TV channel DR3 since December 2016 .
*
In Finland , the series is shown by Yle on the Yle Areena streaming service since December 2016 .
*
In Iceland , the series is shown by RÚV on both its streaming service and television channel .
*
In Sweden , the series is shown by SVT on the SVT Play streaming service since December 2016 .
RECEPTION NORWAY AND NORDIC COUNTRIES Section::::Reception . Section::::Norway and Nordic countries .
In Norway , on average , about 192,000 viewers watched the first season , with the first episode being one of the most viewed of all time on NRK TV online .
In the first week of June 2016 , streaming of Skam was responsible for over half of the traffic on NRK TV .
Following the release of the third - season finale , NRK stated that the second season had an average audience of 531,000 , while the third season broke all streaming records on its NRK TV service with an average audience of 789,000 people .
The trailer for the fourth season , released on 7 April 2017 , was watched by 900,000 people within four days .
During the start of the fourth season , 1.2 million unique users had visited Skams website , and the first episode had been watched by 317,000 people .
NRK P3 editorial chief Håkon Moslet told Verdens Gang that " We see that there is high traffic and high interest for season 4 .
Since the end of the season we have seen a pattern around viewer interest .
We lie high in the first week and towards the end of the season when the drama kicks in . "
In May 2017 , NRK published a report on 2016 viewing statistics , writing that the third season broke both the streaming record for a series on NRK TV and for streaming of any series in Norway .
An October 2016 Aftenposten report detailed that Skam had become popular in Sweden , with " well over 5000 " viewers with Swedish IP addresses watching the episodes , not counting the individual clips .
A later report from Verdens Gang in January 2017 stated that Skam had " broken all records " in Sweden , with over 25 million plays on SVT Play .
Following the series ' licensing deal for broadcasting in Denmark , the series broke records in January 2017 , with the show 's first episode scoring 560,000 viewers on DR TV .
In Finland , the first episode had more than 130,000 views by the end of February 2017 , two and half months after its release , described by Yle audience researcher Anne Hyvärilä as " quite exceptional " .
Skam has received critical acclaim .
The newspaper NATT&DAG selected it as the best TV series of 2015 .
In its second season , Kripos , Norway 's National Criminal Investigation Service , praised the series ' handling of sexual abuse , including the girls ' encouraging the victim , Noora , to go to the emergency room to explain the situation and gather evidence of the abuse , and Noora confronting her abuser with relevant laws he has broken to prevent the sharing of photographs showing her naked .
The National Center for Prevention of Sexual Assault also praised the portrayal , adding that they wish for the series to become a syllabus in schools .
In the third season , Martine Lunder Brenne of Verdens Gang praised the theme of homosexuality and wrote that " I praise it first and foremost because young homosexual people , both in and outside the closet , finally get some long - awaited and modern role models .
It does n't matter if it 's a character in a fictional drama - right now , Skam is Norway 's coolest show " .
In the fourth season , Christopher Pahle of Dagbladet praised a conversation about religion , writing : " two young people , with Muslim backgrounds , have a reflected , respectful and enlightening conversation about religion without arguing or taking it to the trenches .
Think about that .
They pick flowers and dribble a ball , and even if they do n't necessarily convince each other , that 's not the purpose either .
The point is that they understand each other " .
Skam has been recognised for its contributions to promote Norwegian language and culture , and to foster affinity between Nordic countries .
In December 2016 , the Nordic Association awarded Skam the annual Nordic Language Prize for its ability to engage a young Nordic audience , connecting with young people across the Nordic region and fostering positive attitudes about the region 's neighbouring languages .
In April 2017 , Skam and its creator Julie Andem were awarded the Peer Gynt Prize , an award given to a person or institution that has had a positive impact on society and made Norway famous abroad .
In June 2017 , just prior to the show 's ending , Aftenposten published a report featuring interviews with many well - known Norwegian television creators , writers and directors , all praising Skam showrunner Julie Andem for her creative work on the show .
Praise was directed at the series ' " unpolished " nature , her ability to maintain " such a high level of quality over a long period of time " , the series ' blend of different sexualities and ethnicities and use of dialogue to resolve issues , and the show 's compassion , thereby its ability to truly capture its generational audience .
The show 's series finale received positive reviews .
Vilde Sagstad Imeland of Verdens Gang praised the final clip for being a " worthy and emotional ending " .
Cecilie Asker of Aftenposten wrote that " The very last episode of Skam leaves us with a big sorrow , a sore loss , and a craving for more .
It could n't have been better . "
On 1 July 2017 , during the celebration of Oslo Pride , Skam , its creator Julie Andem , and actors Tarjei Sandvik Moe , Henrik Holm and Carl Martin Eggesbø were awarded the " Fryd " award , an award given to persons or organizations that break the norms in gender and sexuality in a positive manner .
In February 2018 , Prince William and his wife Catherine , members of the British royal family , visited the Hartvig Nissen school to meet with the cast and learn more about Skam , its impact on the actors ' lives and to discuss youth and mental health .
INTERNATIONAL SUCCESS
Section::::International success .
Starting with season three , the show attracted an international audience , and NRK was therefore heavily asked to add English subtitles to the Skam episodes online .
The requests were declined due to the license for the music presented throughout the series being restricted to a Norwegian audience , and that easy availability outside Norway would violate the terms of NRK 's license agreements .
An attorney for NRK elaborated that YouTube videos featuring more than 50 % original Skam content would be automatically removed .
When denied official subtitling , fans started making their own translations of the episodes into several world languages , greatly expanding the online fanbase .
Norwegian viewers were quick to share translated clips quickly after availability through Google Drive , and also started blogs to cover additional material and language courses to explain Norwegian slang .
By the end of 2016 , Skam had been trending globally several times on Twitter and Tumblr , and its Facebook , Instagram and Vine presence grew rapidly .
On social media , fandoms developed creative paintings , screensavers , phone covers , and fan videos .
Filming locations , including Sagene Church , and the Hartvig Nissen school , were visited by fans , and the actors were receiving worldwide attention .
After being featured in an episode in the third season , Gabrielle 's song " 5 fine frøkner " saw a 3,018 percent increase in listening on Spotify , with over 13 million streams and , at one point , rising to eighth place on the Swedish top music rankings .
Its social media popularity continued into its fourth season in April 2017 , with over 20,000 tweets containing # skamseason4 registered in 24 hours at the time of season four 's first clip , a substantial portion of which originated from the United States .
In January 2017 , Skam was geoblocked for foreign viewers .
NRK attorney Kari Anne Lang - Ree stated that " NRK has a right to publish content to the Norwegian audience and foreign countries .
The music industry is reacting to the fact that many international viewers are listening to music despite NRK not having international licensing deals .
NRK takes the concerns from the music industry seriously .
We are in dialogue with [ the music industry ] to find a solution " .
NRK stated that " We want to thank our international fans and followers who have embraced SKAM .
We are blown away by your dedication – it is something we never expected .
That is why it hurts to tell you guys that due to a necessary clarification with the music right holders , SKAM will until further notice not be available outside Norway .
We are working hard to figure out how to solve this issue so that the fans can continue to enjoy SKAM from where they are " .
When the fourth season premiered in April , the geoblock was removed for Nordic countries .
The series has received significant attention from international media publications for its unique distribution model of real - time snippet - based information .
Anna Leszkiewicz of New Statesman posted in March 2017 that she considered Skam " the best show on TV " , hightlighting the second season 's handling of sexual assault .
She praised the series for avoiding " shocking , gratuitous rape scenes " , instead focusing on a single hand gesture by abuser Nico as a sign of predatory behavior .
However , Leszkiewicz criticized the show for taking the " escape route " , in which Noora finds the courage to speak to another girl who was at the party , who insists that , while Noora and Nico were in bed together , no sexual intercourse took place .
Leszkiewicz commented that " So many women go through what Noora went through in Skam .
Most of them do n't get offered the same escape route .
Instead , they have to live with the shame and confusion of an " ambiguous " assault . "
The same month , Elite Dailys Dylan Kickham wrote that the international fanbase for Skam on social media was " much larger than I ever would have predicted " , with major fangroups on Twitter , Facebook , and Tumblr .
He credited the third season 's storyline of homosexuality , calling it " incredibly intimate and profound " , particularly praising a scene featuring a conversation about flamboyant attitudes between main character Isak and supporting character Eskild .
While acknowledging highlights of the past two seasons , Kickham explained that " season three stands above the rest by shining a light on aspects of sexuality that are very rarely depicted in mainstream media " , praising Eskild 's " magnificent and timely take on the toxic " masc - for - masc " discrimination within the gay community " in response to Isak 's homophobic comments .
" It 's these small , incisive moments that show just how much Skam understands and cares about the issues it portrays " , explained Kickham .
In March 2017 , voters of E !
Online 's poll regarding " Top Couple 2017 " declared characters Isak and Even , main stars of the show 's third season , the winners .
Verdens Gang wrote in April that Skam had become popular in China , where publicly discussing homosexuality is illegal .
It reported that almost four million Chinese people had watched the third season through piracy and a total of six million had watched all episodes so far translated to Chinese .
The report also stated that NRK has no plans to stop piracy in China , and NRK P3 editorial chief Håkon Moslet told Verdens Gang that " It was Isak and Even that captured a young Chinese audience .
There 's a lot of censorship in China , and they are role models and have a relationship that Chinese people have a need to see . "
Anna Leszkiewicz wrote three more articles on Skam and its impact between April and December 2017 .
In the first report , she credited the series for having tackled multiple difficult topics with the use of universal emotions like loneliness rather than issue - based strategies .
In the second , she specifically focused on the series ' ending , noting that it originally had nine characters designed to each lead a season , and quoted fans with the sentiment that " It seems like such an abrupt decision .
It does n't serve the storyline at all . "
Acknowledging the pressure of the show 's global popularity as potentially a key element to end Skam , Leszkiewicz highlighted some fans ' disapproval of the storylines presented towards the ending ; season four 's main character Sana , a member of the Muslim religion who had been under - represented in the series , had a shorter amount of focus in her season than other main characters had at their respective times ; the final moments of the series focused on short stories by characters not given their own season , one of which told the story of a minor character without significant relevancy to the series ; and a lackluster conversation about Islamophobia between Sana and her white , non - Muslim friend Isak .
Leszkiewicz quoted disgruntled fans , one of which said that " Sana has been disrespected and disregarded and erased and sidelined and that is fucking gross .
She deserved better " .
Finally , in her last report , she focused on Skams legacy as an American adaption was in production .
NRK P3 editorial chief Håkon Moslet told her that " There was a lot of piracy " , acknowledging that the show 's global popularity was the result of fans illegally distributing content through Google Drive , though adding " But we did n't mind " .
Producer and project manager Marianne Furevold explained that " We were given a lot of time to do so much research , and I think that 's a huge part of the success that we see today with Skam " , referencing extensive in - depth interviews , attending schools and youth clubs , and immersing into teenagers ' online lives , something that she did not think would have been possible with a commercial network .
In regards to ending the series after its fourth season , while its popularity peaked , Moslet told Leszkiewicz that writer Julie Andem spent an enormous amount of time developing the series ; " It was kind of an extreme sport to make , this series , especially for her .
It was her life , 24/7 , for two and a half years .
It was enough , I think .
And she wanted to end on a high .
So that 's the reason .
I think it was the right thing " .
Andem had posted on Instagram that she " would n't have been able to make a season five as good as it deserved to be " , though she had also written that she did n't want to give away the producing job of the American version , opting to take on the responsibility of that adaptation .
That decision itself disgruntled fans , who " found her decision to leave the Norwegian series just to take on another huge commitment with the American show disappointing " .
Moslet praised the series ' diverse set of characters , concluding with the statement that " At a time of confusion and intolerance , it seems more important than ever " for content creators to embrace diversity and reject intolerant attitudes .
In December 2017 , Tumblr released its list of the most talked - about shows of the year on its platform , with Skam topping the chart as number one , outranking hugely successful American series Game of Thrones , Stranger Things , and The Walking Dead .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Year !
Organization !
Category !
Nominee(s ) !
Result !
Ref .
rowspan="8
" 2016 rowspan="6 " Gullruten
Best TV drama rowspan="3 " rowspan="6 " Best new show Innovation of the year
Best film editing TV drama
Ida Vennerød Kolstø Newcomer of the year Julie AndemMari Magnus Audience Award Noora ( Josefine Pettersen ) C21Media International Drama Awards
Best digital original rowspan="3 " Foreningen Norden Nordic language prize
rowspan="8
" 2017 rowspan="6 " Gullruten
Best TV drama rowspan="6 " Best Actor Tarjei Sandvik
Moe
Best Writing for a Drama rowspan="2"Julie Andem Best Directing for a Drama TV Moment of the Year
" O helga natt " Audience Award Henrik HolmTarjei
Sandvik Moe
Peer Gynt
AS
Peer Gynt Prize Nordiske Seriedagers Awards
Best Nordic TV - drama Skam season 4 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official series archive