12 STRONG
12 Strong ( also known as 12
Strong :
The Declassified True Story of the Horse Soldiers ) is a 2018 American action war drama film directed by Nicolai Fuglsig and written by Ted Tally and Peter Craig .
The film is based on Doug Stanton 's non - fiction book Horse Soldiers , which tells the story of U.S. Army Special Forces sent to Afghanistan immediately after the September 11 attacks .
The film stars Chris Hemsworth , Michael Shannon , Michael Peña , Navid Negahban , Trevante Rhodes , Geoff Stults , Thad Luckinbill , William Fichtner , and Rob Riggle .
Principal photography began in January 2017 in New Mexico .
The film was released in the United States on January 19 , 2018 by Warner Bros. Pictures , in standard and IMAX theaters .
It received mixed reviews from critics , who praised the cast and action but criticized the by - the - numbers execution and lack of hindsight of the War in Afghanistan .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Mitch Nelson , a US Army Captain with Green Berets Operational Detachment Alpha ( ODA )
595 , is moving into a new home with his wife and daughter on September 11 , 2001 , after receiving an assignment to staff duty under LTC Bowers .
As news of the devastating terrorist attacks that day break , Nelson volunteers to lead 595 into Afghanistan .
Bowers initially refuses , but veteran soldier CW5 Hal Spencer , previously scheduled to retire , persuades Bowers to give Nelson command of 595 again , as well as volunteering himself for the deployment .
After leaving their families , 595 travels to Uzbekistan on October 7 , 2001 .
After being briefed and evaluated by COL Mulholland , Commander of 5th Special Forces Group , Nelson and 595 are picked to fight alongside Northern Alliance leader Abdul Rashid Dostum .
ODA 595 is inserted covertly in Afghanistan aboard an MH-47 Chinook flown by 160th SOAR .
They land 40 miles south of Mazar -
i Sharif , the country 's fourth - largest city and a longtime stronghold of the Taliban , where they meet Dostum .
Six of the 12 members , led by Nelson , leave with Dostum to the mountains , while the other six remain in a fortified camp nicknamed " The Alamo " under Spencer 's command .
Dostum is attempting to capture the northern Afghanistan city , while battling Taliban leader Mullah Razzan , who rules local communities brutally under strict Sharia law , and has murdered several people , including Dostum 's family .
Although the warlord is initially skeptical of Nelson 's abilities , Nelson gradually earns Dostum 's respect .
In one battle , however , Dostum makes a tactical error , costing several casualties .
Nelson accuses Dostum of acting carelessly with the lives of his men and of withholding valuable information , while Dostum retorts that he still feels that Nelson , and the U.S. , is not willing to pay the potential price of the conflict , and tells Nelson that he needs to use his heart and mind to " be a warrior " instead of a soldier .
The two eventually reconcile , and , after splitting off a three - man element under SFC Sam Diller to strike a Taliban supply route , and being joined by Spencer 's half of ODA 595 , continue to work together .
They win several victories with Dostum 's leadership and manpower and American airpower , making significant progress towards Mazar - i Sharif .
Suddenly , however , Spencer informs Nelson that another ODA , 555 , has been dispatched to support Atta Muhammad , another Northern Alliance leader , who is Dostum 's political rival .
When Nelson is forced to tell Dostum , the furious warlord and his men promptly abandon 595 .
Following Dostum 's departure , Nelson plans to continue operating against the Taliban with his Americans and the few Afghan fighters remaining with them .
Encountering a large force of Al - Qaeda and Taliban fighters and armored vehicles , ODA 595 , rejoined by Diller and his element , uses air support to eliminate many of the fighters and most of the armor , but are discovered and attacked .
Spencer is critically injured by a suicide bomber , and the team is about to be overrun under heavy Taliban and Al - Qaeda pressure when Dostum returns with his forces .
Carrying out the US Army 's first cavalry charge of the 21st century , the American and Northern Alliance forces disperse the Taliban and Al - Qaeda , and Dostum tracks down and kills Razzan .
After Spencer is medevaced , Nelson and Dostum continue to Mazar - i - Sharif but find Atta Muhammad has beaten them there .
Against expectations , Dostum and Muhammad meet peacefully and put aside their differences .
Impressed by Nelson and the Americans ' efforts , Dostum gives Nelson his prized riding crop and tells him that he will always consider Nelson a brother and fellow fighter but remember that Afghanistan is the graveyard of empires .
Spencer ultimately survives , and all 12 soldiers of ODA 595 return home after 23 days of almost continuous fighting in Afghanistan .
The film 's penultimate moment shows a photo of the Horse Soldier Statue in New York City , based on the soldiers of ODA 595 and their victory in the early stages of the response to the September 11th attacks , dedicated to all United States Special Forces .
The film then ends with a photo of the actual members of ODA 595 , in combat fatigues , upon whom 12 Strong was based .
CAST
* Chris Hemsworth as Captain Mitch Nelson , ODA 595 's commander , inspired by Mark Nutsch .
* Michael Shannon as Hal Spencer , a Chief Warrant Officer 5 and ODA 595 's assistant team leader , inspired by Bob Pennington .
* Michael Peña as Sam Diller , ODA 595 's intelligence Sergeant First Class * Navid Negahban as General Dostum , a leader of the Northern Alliance and future Vice President of Afghanistan
* Trevante Rhodes as Ben Milo , a Sergeant First Class in ODA 595 * William Fichtner as Colonel Mulholland , Commander of 5th Special Forces Group * Geoff Stults as Sean Coffers , member of ODA 595
* Thad Luckinbill as Vern Michaels , member of ODA 595
* Ben O'Toole as Scott Black , member of ODA 595 * Kenny Sheard as Bill Bennett , a Sergeant First Class in ODA 595
* Austin Stowell as Fred Falls , a Staff Sergeant in ODA 595
* Austin Hébert as Pat Essex , a Master Sergeant in ODA 595
* Jack Kesy as Charles Jones , member of ODA 595 * Kenneth Miller as Kevin Jackson , member of ODA 595
* Elsa Pataky as Jean Nelson , Mitch 's wife ( actors Hemsworth and Pataky are married in real life )
* Rob Riggle as Lt .
Colonel Bowers , Commander of 3rd Battalion , 5th Special Forces Group * Taylor Sheridan as Brian , a paramilitary field officer with the CIA 's Special Activities Division who meets ODA 595 when the SOAR deliver them to Afghanistan * Fahim Fazli as Khaled , a commander in Afghanistan 's Northern Alliance * Laith Nakli as Commander Ahmed Lal PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production . Section::::Development .
On December 2 , 2011 , it was announced that producer Jerry Bruckheimer had taken out the script by Ted Tally and rewritten by Peter Craig with Nicolai Fuglsig attached to direct , which was bought by Walt Disney Pictures in 2009 for Bruckheimer , based on Doug Stanton 's non - fiction book Horse Soldiers .
On March 29 , 2016 , Deadline reported that Bruckheimer had officially hired Fuglsig to make his feature film directorial debut , which would be co - financed and produced by Molly Smith , Trent Luckinbill and Thad Luckinbill through Black Label Media , along with Bruckheimer 's Jerry Bruckheimer Films .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
On September 30 , 2016 , Chris Hemsworth and Michael Shannon were cast in the film , and later on November 1 , Michael Peña also joined the film .
On November 3 , 2016 , Trevante Rhodes was cast in the film .
On November 14 , 2016 , Austin Stowell was cast in the film to play Staff Sergeant Fred Falls , an American soldier on the elite U.S. Special Forces team .
Lionsgate would handle the film 's distribution .
On November 15 , 2016 , Austin Hébert was cast to play SFC Pat Essex , the intellectual and engineer of the team , and the same day it was reported that Ben O'Toole had also been cast for an unspecified role .
On November 17 , 2016 , Variety reported that Navid Negahban was cast to play General Abdul Rashid Dostum in the film .
Elsa Pataky was revealed to be appearing in the film in December 2016 , while on February 3 , 2017 , Deadline reported that Rob Riggle joined the film to play Army Lieutenant Colonel Max Bowers , under whom Riggle actually served while he was a Marine Captain .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography began in early January 2017 in New Mexico .
Mines near Orogrande , New Mexico , were used .
Later the shooting took place in Socorro , where it ended on January 26 after eight days of filming .
The film was also shot in Alamogordo , using the White Sands National Monument as shooting location .
The scenes involving military encampments were filmed using 20 structures leased from AKS Military , a private manufacturer of military shelters .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Warner Bros. Home Entertainment released 12 Strong digitally April 10 , and on Blu - ray Disc and DVD May 1 .
Blu - ray extras include the featurettes " 12 Strong :
The Making of an Impossible Mission " and " Monumental Effort :
Building America 's Response Monument . "
POSTSCRIPT Section::::Postscript .
The films postscript reads as follows : " Against overwhelming odds , all twelve members of the U.S. Army Special Forces ODA 595 survived their mission .
The capture of Mazar - i - Sharif by the Horse Soldiers and their counterparts is one of the US military 's most stunning achievements .
Military planners predicted it would take two years .
Task Force Dagger did it in three weeks .
Al Qaeda considers this to be their worst defeat .
Because their mission was classified , the men of Special Forces ODA 595 returned home to their everyday lives with no fanfare or public acknowledgment of the near impossible mission they completed .
In 2014 , General Dostum became Vice President of Afghanistan .
Dostum and Mitch Nelson remain close friends to this day .
In 2012 , to honor their extraordinary heroism , a statue of a Horse Soldier was dedicated at the World Trade Center site . " RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
12 Strong grossed $ 46.7 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 24.1 million in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 70.8 million , against a production budget of $ 35 million .
In the United States and Canada , 12 Strong was released on January 19 , 2018 alongside Den of Thieves and Forever My Girl , as well as the wide expansions of Phantom Thread , I , Tonya and Call Me by Your Name , and was projected to gross $ 15–20 million from 3,002 theaters in its opening weekend .
It ended up debuting to $ 15.8 million , similar to the $ 16.1 million that war film opened to in January 2016 , and finished second at the box office behind .
According to ComScore , 55 % of the opening weekend audience was male , with 79 % being over the age of 25 .
The following week dropped 45 % to $ 8.6 million , finishing 6th at the box office .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 53 % based on 148 reviews , and an average rating of 5.5/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " 12 Strong has a solid cast , honorable intentions , and a thrilling , fact - based story — all of which are occasionally enough to balance a disappointing lack of depth or nuance . "
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 54 out of 100 , based on reviews from 43 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A " on an A+ to F scale , while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave an 81 % overall positive score and a 63 % " definite recommend " .
Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun - Times gave the film 2.5 out of 4 stars , saying , " ...
with a running time of two hours and 10 minutes , 12 Strong has at least 20 minutes of scenes that are either unnecessary or repetitive ...
[it ] winds up being an almost - good film about some great American soldiers . "
Matt Bobkin of Exclaim !
gave the film a 4 out of 10 , calling it " a lazy attempt at injecting something fresh into the 9/11 narrative . "
ACCOLADES
People 's Choice Awards RELATED LINKS
* 5th Special Forces Group
* America 's Response Monument REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* 12 Strong , Warner Bros. website