SEVEN SECONDS ( TV SERIES )
Seven Seconds is an American crime drama web television series , based on the Russian film
The Major written and directed by Yuri Bykov , that premiered on February 23 , 2018 , on Netflix .
The series , created , executive produced , and showrun by Veena Sud , follows the people involved in investigating the death of a young black boy and the boy 's family as they reel after the loss .
On April 18 , 2018 , Netflix confirmed there would not be a second season , deeming it a limited series .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
Peter Jablonski , a white police officer , accidentally hits and critically injures Brenton Butler — a black teenager from Jersey City — with his car .
Jablonski calls his friends on the force to the scene .
They assume Brenton is dead and a cover up ensues .
Racial tensions explode in the face of injustice and the absence of quick resolution of the case .
CAST AND CHARACTERS
MAIN * Clare - Hope Ashitey as K.J. Harper * Beau Knapp as Peter Jablonski
* Michael Mosley as Joe " Fish "
Rinaldi
* David Lyons as Mike DiAngelo * Russell Hornsby as Isaiah Butler
* Raúl Castillo as Felix Osorio * Patrick Murney as Manny Wilcox * Zackary Momoh as Seth Butler
* Michelle Veintimilla as Marie Jablonski * Regina King as Latrice Butler RECURRING
* Corey Champagne as Kadeuce Porter * Nadia Alexander as Nadine MacAllister * Coley Mustafa Speaks as Messiah * Adriana DeMeo as Teresa * Jeremy Davidson as James Connelly
* Gretchen Mol as Sam Hennessy EPISODES PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production . Section::::Development .
On October 18 , 2016 , it was announced that Netflix had given the production a one season series order consisting of 10 episodes .
The series was created by Veena Sud with Gavin O'Connor attached to direct .
Sud and O'Connor were expected to executive produce alongside Lawrence Bender , Kevin Brown , and Alex Reznik .
Production companies involved with the show include Fox 21 TV Studios .
On April 18 , 2018 , Netflix announced that they were not renewing the series for a second season and were effectively cancelling it .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
On October 25 , 2016 , it was announced that David Lyons and Beau Knapp had joined the show as series regulars .
On November 17 , 2016 , Russell Hornsby , Raul Castillo , and Zackary Momoh joined the main cast .
Later that month , Michael Mosley and Patrick Murney were cast as series regulars as well .
On December 1 , 2016 , it was confirmed that Regina King had been cast in the series regular role of Latrice Butler .
A few weeks later , Clare - Hope Ashitey was cast in the series ' lead role of K.J. Harper .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
On January 24 , 2018 , Netflix released the official trailer for the series and a collection of first look images .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The series has received a positive reception from critics upon its premiere .
On the review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes , the series is certified fresh holding a 78 % approval rating with an average rating of 6.05 out of 10 based on 39 reviews .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Seven Seconds is undermined by unlikable characters with somewhat predictable arcs , but its grim reflections of societal and racial division are brought to life by able performers and a fearless overall narrative . "
Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned the series a score of 68 out of 100 based on 20 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews . "
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
!
scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Category ! scope="col " Nominee(s ) ! scope="col " Result ! scope="col " class="unsortable " REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS