TIK TIK TIK ( 2018 FILM )
Tik Tik Tik is a 2018 Indian Tamil - language science fiction thriller film written and directed by Shakti Soundar Rajan .
It has been promoted as India 's first space film .
It features Jayam Ravi , Nivetha Pethuraj , and Aaron Aziz in the lead roles .
The film is inspired by Armageddon , directed by Michael Bay .
The film was released on 22 june 2018 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
An asteroid strikes the Ennore neighborhood of Chennai .
Astronauts predict that another asteroid is going to hit India within six days .
The Indian Space Research Organisation decides to send Vasu ( Jayam Ravi ) , a trained magician and escape artist , along with his team and a team of scientists to get ahold of a missile in a space center , which they plan to use to destroy the asteroid .
The military also catches Venkat ( Ramesh Thilak ) and Appu ( Arjunan ) , two of Vasu 's good friends .
Vasu , Venkat , and Appu are alerted about the asteroid , and they have to steal a nuclear missile from a Chinese space station .
The mission is disguised as a satellite maintenance project .
Vasu meets Swathi ( Nivetha Pethuraj ) and Raguram ( Vincent Asokan ) , two army officials who are going on the mission with them .
Vasu , Swathi , Venkat , Appu , and Raguram go on the space shuttle , Dhruva-1 .
Just before launch , Vasu 's speech channel is directed to an unknown voice , which tells Vasu that he has kidnapped his son Ravi ( Aarav Ravi ) , who will die unless Vasu gives the missile to him , and Vasu agrees .
While in flight , Vasu goes unconscious , and Swathi and Venkat take him to the sick bay .
There , Vasu wakes up and goes into the wire chamber to cut the wire that controls the liquid hydrogen fuel tank .
Vasu actually faked going unconscious due to directions from the unknown voice .
Vasu cuts the wire , and the fuel tank loses much of its fuel .
Dhruva-1 crash - lands on the moon , where Vasu becomes the first Indian man to step on the moon .
Swathi and Raguram are investigating the problem when Vasu suggests they request fuel from the target space station .
Swathi convinces Raguram to fly to the space station .
The space station astronauts agree to refuel them .
However , once Vasu , Swathi , Raguram , Venkat , and Appu go on the space station after Dhruva-1 is done docking , they are arrested .
The captain of the space station , Lee Wei ( Aaron Aziz ) , tells them that he knows about the asteroid and that they want to get his missile .
He refuses to give it , saying that they want the asteroid to strike so that China , Lee 's native country , can gain more power by signing contracts to rebuild southern India and Sri Lanka .
Lee tells his soldiers to release Vasu and the rest of the crew when the asteroid bypasses the safety line because if it bypasses , there is no chance of diverting it .
Meanwhile , Ritika ( Rethika Srinivas ) , a high - ranking official managing the mission , discovers photos of Vasu cutting the wires .
She suspects that someone managing the mission caused Vasu to do that .
Chief Mahendran ( Jayaprakash ) is revealed to be the unknown voice .
Back at the space station , Vasu attempts to fight against the soldiers before being handcuffed .
The soldiers take the briefcase he is holding and keep it aside .
Venkat , who was hiding in the briefcase , comes out and inserts a USB drive into the space station 's computer system .
He and Vasu work on downloading a bug into the space station via the USB drive .
They , along with the other crew members , learn that Lee 's fingerprint and iris are required to unlock the cell that hides the missile .
Vasu is able to obtain Lee 's fingerprint and iris scans , which he uses to unlock the cell .
Vasu tells Lee that the missile is in Dhruva-1 .
Vasu then tells Swathi to tell Lee that the missile is aimed at China .
It is revealed that Vasu used a magic trick to make it look as if it was gone .
He proceeds to steal the missile , sounding the alarm and alerting Lee and his soldiers .
Swathi , Raguram , Appu , and Venkat escape to Dhruva-1 .
Vasu steals the missile and escapes to Dhruva-1 with a low oxygen tank .
The crew settles down and proceeds to fly to the asteroid .
On the way , another space shuttle , Dhruva-2 , will refuel Dhruva-1 .
Vasu gives the missile to Dhruva-2 .
Back on Earth , Mahendran lets Ravi go .
Dhruva-1 then proceeds to the asteroid .
Once they get close to the asteroid , Swathi and Raguram notice that the missile is missing .
Everyone gets worried , and many mission officials fear that their families will die in the asteroid strike .
It is revealed that Vasu discussed the unknown voice with the other crew members , and they formulated a plan .
The " missile " given to Dhruva-2 was actually a fake one .
They proceed to shoot the authentic missile at the asteroid , which destroys the asteroid and saves the world from a catastrophe .
At the mission control center , Ritika finds out that Mahendran was threatening to kill Ravi unless he got the missile but is later killed by him .
In space , a chunk of the asteroid damages Dhruva-1 's left wing , forcing the crew to go in a pod .
The pod lands in a river , and on the banks are the mission control officials who cheer for their victory , along with Ravi and his grandfather .
Vasu and Ravi meet again , and Ravi tells Vasu to look in his pocket .
Vasu takes out a piece of jewelry that was Mahendran 's , and learned it was Mahendran who kidnapped Ravi .
The film fast - forwards to an awards ceremony .
When Vasu gets his award , he gives the piece of jewelry back and whispers to Mahendran , " After all , he 's my son .
"
Vasu walks away with Appu and Venkat while Mahendran commits suicide offscreen .
CAST * Jayam Ravi as M. Vasu * Nivetha Pethuraj as M. Swathi * Aaron Aziz as Captain Lee Wei
* Ramesh Thilak as S. Venkat * Arjunan as Appu * Vincent Asokan as Col . D. Raguram * Jayaprakash as Chief Mahendran * Rethika Srinivas as
Lt . Gen. Rythika
* Balaji Venugopal as Team Head
* Aarav Ravi as Ravi , Vasu 's son * Aathma Patrick as Terrorist PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
After working together in Miruthan ( 2016 ) , Jayam Ravi was again impressed by a storyline narrated by Shakti Soundar Rajan and agreed to work on another film in March 2016 .
Jhabak Movies agreed to produce the venture .
It was revealed that this would be the first Indian film in the space genre .
The team began pre - production work thereafter , with Jayam Ravi describing it as the biggest film in his career .
Actress Nivetha Pethuraj joined the film 's cast in September 2016 .
She was selected due to her knowledge of martial arts .
She is trained in jujutsu and kickboxing .
Aaron Aziz , a Malaysian - based actor who mostly performed in Malaysian and Singaporean drama and films , was selected as the lead villain , marking his entry into Tamil cinema .
Jayam Ravi 's son , Aarav , plays the role of his son in this film too .
D. Imman composed the music for this film , continuing his collaboration with the director .
There is no romance or songs in the film .
The team began filming in October 2016 at EVP Film City and Majestic Studio in Chennai .
The film is also being shot in Munnar , where the shooting has been halted for a while due to the arrival of forest elephants near the shooting spot .
The total duration of VFX scenes is 80 minutes in the film .
The teaser was released on August 15 , 2017 .
The film was initially scheduled to be released on January 26 , 2018 , but was postponed and eventually released on June 22 , 2018 .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The film 's score and songs were composed by D. Imman .
The title track was released on December 11 , 2017 .
The song was sung by YogiB , Yuvan Shankar Raja and Sunitha Sarathy .
The full album was released on January 4 , 2018 .
The album has eight songs , four of which are instrumental songs ( two theme songs and two karaoke songs ) .
All the songs were written by Madhan Karky .
This is Imman 's 100th album . "
Kurumba ( Father 's Love ) " in the film featured real photographs and videos from Jayam Ravi 's personal family collection .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Behindwoods rated the album 3 of 5 stars and said " Imman knocks the ball out of the park for a six to reach his century , and the ball is travelling to space ! "
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film hit the theatres on 22 June 2018 .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Tik Tik Tik received mixed reviews from the critics .
Thinkal Menon of The Times of India praised the film for the laudable attempt and gave it 3.5 stars out of 5 .
Sreedhar Pillai of Firstpost praised it as a reasonably entertaining film with a novel concept and gave it 3 out of 5 stars .
Manoj Kumar R of The Indian Express said that the concept is not original and gave it 4 out of 5 stars .
Sowmya Rajendran of The News Minute praised the film for its impressive VFX scenes .
Vikram Venkateswaran of the Quint called the film a harmless entertainer and gave it 3 stars .
Sudhir Srinivasan of Cinema Express admired the efforts of director in this space genre film and gave it 3 stars .
Priyanka Sundar of Hindustan Times called it a film without logic and gave it 1.5 star .
Gautaman Bhaskaran of News18 stated that the film is unimpressive story , and gave it 1.5 stars .
Kirubhakar Purushothaman of India Today called the film a typical underwhelming commercial film set in space , and gave it 1.5 stars .
Director Venkat Prabhu and actor Arvind Swami praised the film for the effort .
Vishal Menon of The Hindu termed the film simplistic in nature .
J. Hurtado of Screen Anarchy noted that the film had many similarities to Armageddon ( 1998 ) , one of which included the human mission of saving the Earth from an asteroid .
A success celebration was held for the film in Chennai on 29 June 2018 .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
Tamil Nadu theatrical rights of the film were sold for 10.5 crore .
Tik Tik Tik grossed 3 crore on its first day and 12 crore in first three days in Tamil Nadu .
It grossed US$ 45,724 in USA , MYR 2,23,745 in Malaysia , £ 10,480 in UK , A$ 34,493 in Australia , and NZ$ 3,424 in New Zealand in its opening weekend .
The film collected US$ 68,812 in USA , £ 19,046 in UK , and A$ 49,176 in Australia by the end of the second weekend .
Tik Tik Tik collected £ 20,888 in UK , and MYR 5,01,436 in Malaysia by the end of the third weekend .
The film collected MYR 5,11,504 ( 86.6 lacs ) in Malaysia by the end of the fourth weekend .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS