THE MOUNTAIN BETWEEN US ( FILM ) The Mountain Between Us is a 2017 American drama film directed by Hany Abu - Assad and written by Chris Weitz and J. Mills Goodloe , based on the 2011 novel of the same name by Charles Martin .
It stars Idris Elba and Kate Winslet as a surgeon and a journalist , respectively , who survive a plane crash , with a dog , and are stranded in High Uintas Wilderness with injuries and harsh weather conditions .
The film premiered on September 9 , 2017 , at the 2017 Toronto International Film Festival , and was theatrically released in the United States on October 6 , 2017 , by 20th Century Fox .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
After their flight is cancelled due to stormy weather , neurosurgeon Dr. Ben Bass ( Idris Elba ) and photojournalist Alex Martin ( Kate Winslet ) hire private pilot Walter ( Beau Bridges ) to get them to Denver for connecting flights to Alex 's wedding in New York and Ben 's emergency surgery appointment in Baltimore .
Walter , who has not filed a flight plan , suffers a fatal stroke mid - flight , and the plane crashes on a mountaintop in the High Uintas Wilderness .
Ben , Alex , and Walter 's dog survive the crash with various injuries .
Alex thinks Ben has a better chance of finding help if he leaves her behind , but Ben refuses .
Stranded for days with dwindling supplies , Alex grows skeptical that they will be rescued , although Ben wants to wait for help by the plane 's wreckage .
After arguing , Alex starts a lone descent down the mountain .
Ben catches up and they make - up over past grievances .
Alex falls into freezing water near an abandoned cabin .
They stay there for several days while Alex recuperates , and they have sex .
Ben reveals that his wife died two years prior from a brain tumor .
As Ben sleeps , Alex takes his picture .
Later , she again asks Ben to leave her behind to find help .
Ben initially agrees but soon returns ; they press forward again .
The dog alerts them to a nearby timber yard .
On their way toward it , Ben 's leg gets caught in a bear trap .
Alex can not free him , but she reaches the yard and collapses in front of an approaching truck .
Ben awakens in a hospital and goes to Alex 's room , where he finds her with Mark ( Dermot Mulroney ) , her fiancé .
After a brief discussion , Ben leaves heartbroken .
Some time after , Mark discovers Alex is no longer in love with him .
Ben and Alex go their separate ways after the hospital , with Ben keeping the dog .
Alex tries calling Ben , but he ignores her calls until she sends him pictures of them on the mountain .
This encourages Ben to call Alex .
They meet at a restaurant , where it is revealed that Alex is now a part - time teacher , and Ben is a consultant at trauma clinics because his frostbitten hands have not recovered sufficiently for him to perform surgery .
Ben says he did not call Alex because he thought she would be married ; Alex says she could not go through with it because she fell in love with Ben .
After leaving the restaurant , Ben admits to Alex that they survived because they fell in love .
Alex dismisses her feelings and reminds Ben of something he said on the mountain : " the heart is just a muscle .
" They hug goodbye , but as they depart in opposite directions they run back to each other .
CAST
* Idris Elba as Dr. Ben Bass , a neurosurgeon
* Kate Winslet as Alex Martin , a photojournalist * Dermot Mulroney as Mark , Alex 's fiancé
* Beau Bridges as Walter , the pilot of the charter plane * Raleigh and Austin as Walter 's dog PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The project was first developed in January 2012 , with Mexican director Gerardo Naranjo set to direct a script by J. Mills Goodloe .
In August 2012 , Scott Frank was hired to re - write the script .
In November 2014 , Hany Abu - Assad replaced Naranjo , and Chris Weitz was later hired to re - write the script .
Abu - Assad has said of the film , " I really did n't see an epic love story against the background of survival
, I think optimism and hope is crucial to survive .
And to go on with your life even if you 've had a lot of bad luck .
So if you give ( in ) to the bad luck , you will die .
( But ) if you fight the bad luck , you have a better chance to survive and make your life better .
This is very simple wisdom , yes ?
But still very crucial especially in these kind of days , when everybody feels entitled to their good luck . "
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
The film went through several lead casting changes .
In March 2012 , it was announced that Michael Fassbender would star as Bass , but by September 2014 , Fassbender dropped out due to a scheduling conflict , and Charlie Hunnam replaced him .
Margot Robbie also came on board to star as Alex .
In November 2014 , Robbie dropped out of the project , and Rosamund Pike entered negotiations for the lead role .
In December 2015 , both Hunnam and Pike dropped out .
In February 2016 , Idris Elba came on board , followed by Kate Winslet in June 2016 .
Dermot Mulroney joined the cast as Winslet 's character 's fiancé in early February 2017 .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography started on December 5 , 2016 , in Vancouver , and continued until February 24 , 2017 .
Elba and Winslet filmed scenes at the Vancouver International Airport on December 6 , 2016 ; Elba also filmed scenes at the Abbotsford International Airport on December 7 , 2016 .
Filming stopped for Christmas holidays , from December 20 , 2016 to January 3 , 2017 .
Filming resumed around Invermere and Panorama Mountain Village on January 4 , 2017 .
Winslet was spotted filming scenes at Eagle Ridge Hospital in Port Moody on February 8 , 2017 .
Most of the filming took place in Canada , on the border of Alberta and British Columbia .
Abu - Assad has described the locations as having very cold temperatures , and tough and harsh filming conditions .
Many scenes were shot on a mountaintop , and he and the crew had to drive 40 minutes before reaching the film 's base camp .
When the weather was okay , they could board the helicopter to reach their destination along with their supplies .
On July 19 , 2017 , Winslet and Elba were spotted in London
re - shooting some scenes for the film .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
German - Iranian composer Ramin Djawadi composed & conducted the music for the film .
The official trailer for the movie was released with " Dusk Till Dawn " by Zayn and Sia as the official soundtrack .
The score from the film is now released at Lakeshore Records .
RELEASES Section::::Releases .
The film premiered at the 2017 Toronto International Film Festival , on September 9 , 2017 .
The film was initially set for release in the United States on October 20 , 2017 but was later moved up to October 6 , 2017 .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office . , The Mountain Between Us has grossed $ 30.3 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 30.7 million in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 62.3 million , against a production budget of $ 35 million .
In the United States and Canada , the film was released alongside Blade Runner 2049 and , and was expected to gross $ 11–12 million from 3,088 theaters in its opening weekend .
It ended up debuting to $ 10.1 million , finishing second at the box office , behind Blade Runner 2049 ( $ 32.5 million ) .
The film dropped 47 % in its second weekend , making $ 5.7 million and falling to 5th .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 41 % , based on 155 reviews , with an average rating of 5.1/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " The Mountain Between Us may be too far - fetched for some viewers to appreciate , but it 's elevated by reliably engaging performances from Idris Elba and Kate Winslet . "
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 48 out of 100 , based on 37 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A− " on an A+ to F scale .
Jordan Mintzer of The Hollywood Reporter described the film as " an easily digestible love story - come - survival tale that tosses two excellent actors in the snow and lets them do their thing , " before concluding that " what really helps Mountain overcome its far - fetched scenario is the pairing of Winslet and Elba , who know how to turn up the charm tenfold yet make Alex and Ben seem ( mostly ) like real people . "
Tim Grierson of ScreenDaily noted that the film " struggles to balance its life - or - death stakes with its far more florid love story , " but added that " the considerable chemistry between Kate Winslet and Idris Elba certainly helps sell this tearjerker . "
In his review for Variety , Peter Debruge described it as " a movie in which neither the subzero temperature nor the romantic heat penetrates more than skin deep . "
Also criticising the film , Steve Pond of TheWrap found it unnecessarily lengthy and said that " a love story cheapens the grand survival story . "
Ignatiy Vishnevetsky of The A.V. Club criticized the central characters as " a couple of one - note personality - test types " with " zero romantic chemistry , " and wrote that the script " actually tones down the howling outrageousness of Martin 's novel , which seems to miss the point .
But , structurally , it 's the same junk .
Problems pop out of nowhere and resolve themselves , while torturous motivations attempt to explain why characters would withhold basic information from one another for weeks ... " REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS