MARY AND THE WITCH 'S FLOWER
The film tells a story of a girl named Mary Smith who finds " fly - by - night " , a mysterious flower that can give her the power to become a witch for only one night .
The film was released in Japan on 8 July 2017 .
In the English - language version of the film , which was concurrently released with a subtitled version in the United States on 19 January 2018 , the film features the voices of Ruby Barnhill , Kate Winslet , and Jim Broadbent .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The film begins when a magic laboratory has caught fire .
A red - haired girl slips away with a satchel , but is seen and pursued .
The girl manages to escape on her flying broomstick , but a massive explosion knocks her off her broomstick .
The broomstick and satchel fall to the ground .
Out of the satchel spill magic seeds , which cause the plants and animals in the area to rapidly grow .
Young Mary Smith moves into the British estate of her Great Aunt Charlotte while her parents are away .
The bored , friendless girl creates messes as she tries to make herself useful through doing chores .
A local young boy named Peter teases her for both her clumsiness and her wild red hair , which she hates .
Tib and Gib , Peter 's cats , lead Mary to some mysterious blue glowing flowers in the forest .
Zebedee , the estate gardener , identifies the flowers as " fly - by - night " ( said to have magical power ) .
The next day , Gib disappears and Mary follows Tib to go look for her .
Tib leads her to a broomstick ensnared in tree roots .
Mary frees the broomstick , but accidentally bursts a fly - by - night on it .
The flower releases magical power in the form of a blue gooey substance , making the broomstick come to life , and enabling Mary to ride it like a witch .
The Little Broomstick whisks Mary and Tib away to a complex of buildings hidden in the clouds .
Flanagan , a fox creature who looks after students ' broomsticks , scolds her for crash - landing her broomstick and tells her she 's at the Endor College for witches and warlocks .
The school 's headmistress , Madam Mumblechook , assumes that Mary is a new pupil with Tib as her familiar , and takes her on a tour of the college .
The tour reveals a campus with modern technology and conveniences , wherein students take courses in magic arts alongside fields of science such as chemistry .
During the tour Madam introduces Mary to Doctor Dee , the College 's renowned chemistry teacher .
Mary finds herself able to perform advanced spells such as invisibility .
Madam and Doctor Dee become convinced that Mary is a prodigy , because of her performance as well as her red hair , which turns out be a distinguishing feature of the strongest witches .
At Madam 's office , Mary finds a spell book hidden behind a picture of a fly - by - night .
Mary admits that her magical ability comes from fly - by - night , and that Tib actually belongs to Peter .
Madam 's attitude to Mary suddenly changes , but she still lets Mary return home .
The magic granted to Mary by the flower ends as the sun sets , and Mary barely makes it home safely .
That night , Madam sends a message to Mary informing her that she 's kidnapped Peter , and demands that Mary turn the fly - by - night over to her .
She and Tib fly back to Endor with the flowers .
Madam and Doctor Dee imprison her in Doctor Dee 's transformation lab .
Mary finds Peter in the lab , and discovers Doctor Dee has been experimenting on animals , including Gib , transforming them into fantastic creatures .
In the spell book , Mary finds a spell that can undo all magic , and uses it to undo all the transformations , and unlock the lab .
As they try to escape , they find themselves cornered on a balcony , only for Flanagan to return the Little Broomstick , scolding Mary for leaving it lying around .
Mary then escapes , but Madam and Doctor Dee recapture Peter .
The Little Broomstick takes Mary to an isolated cottage .
Within the cottage , Mary finds notes on transformation spells and a mirror , that Great Aunt Charlotte uses to contact her .
Charlotte reveals that the cottage was her previous home , and she used to be a red - haired pupil at Endor , the very one from the introduction .
One day Charlotte found fly - by - night , leading Madam and Doctor Dee to obsessively pursue a project to use the flower to transform humans into witches .
When their experiment disastrously failed , Charlotte decided to escape Endor , taking the flower with her .
Charlotte begs Mary to use her last bud to return home , but Mary vows to rescue Peter instead .
As Mary attempts to return to Endor , Madam chases her , demanding the spell book back .
The book is taken in the aerial pursuit , and Mary falls near the lab .
The Little Broomstick breaks , and the magic of the flower expires .
Mary makes her way to the lab , and finds Madam and Doctor Dee trying to use the flower to transform Peter into an all - powerful witch .
The experiment fails again , leaving Peter trapped within a gelatinous monster that rampages across the lab , draining the magic of all in its path .
Mary gets the spell book from Madam , and realizes Peter can use magic now .
Taking Peter 's hand from within the monster , Mary gives him the book with the spell to undo magic , allowing him to activate it .
It undoes the failed experiment as well as all of Madam and Doctor Dee 's research relating to it .
The lab is destroyed .
Mary awakens in the ruins of the lab , which has been completely grown over .
Flanagan returns her broomstick to her , having repaired it , and scolds her for leaving her broomstick lying wherever she wants .
The two take the Broomstick back home , but while flying , Peter sees a Witch 's Flower bud in her hair .
She throws it away , stating she does n't need magic anymore .
The last bud of the flower explodes in midair , no longer needed .
Mary returns home and goes to school with Peter .
The Little Broomstick leans against the wall at the manor , home .
VOICE CAST Section::::Voice cast . !
Character !
Japanese Voice actor !
English Voice actor Saori Hayami MUSIC Section::::Music .
Composer Muramatsu Takatsugu , who also scored Yonebayashi 's last film When Marnie Was There , is in charge of the soundtrack for Mary and The Witch 's Flower .
Joshua Messick , one of the world 's leading performers of the hammered dulcimer , participated in the score recording .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Mary and The Witch 's Flower was released theatrically in Japan on July 8 , 2017 by distributor Toho , airing on 458 screens across Japan .
Altitude Film Sales announced at the Berlin International Film Festival that it had acquired the worldwide rights to the film , and would release the film within the UK .
Madman Entertainment announced that it had secured the rights to the film within Australia and New Zealand , and would premiere the film theatrically at Madman Anime Festival in Melbourne on November 5 , 2017 , with a wider release on January 18 , 2018 .
GKIDS later announced that it would distribute the film within North America , with a one - week Oscar qualifying run on December 1 , 2017 , a limited opening on January 18 , 2018 , and a wider release on January 19 , 2018 .
Altitude ( the UK distributor ) confirmed in early March 2018 that the film will have a special holding at selected Vue Cinemas on April 10 , 2018 before it 's official UK wide release on May 4 , 2018 .
The English dub of Mary and The Witch 's Flower ( starring Ruby Barnhill , Kate Winslet , Jim Broadbent ) was directed by Giles New and produced by Geoffrey Wexler .
The English dub was recorded in July and August 2017 in London , and had its premiere in Los Angeles on October 23 , 2017 at the GKIDS " Animation is Film " festival .
The movie was released on DVD , Blu - ray , Digital HD and 4 K Ultra HD by Walt Disney Japan on March 20 , 2018 .
The film was released on DVD and Blu - ray in North America by GKIDS ' main home media distributor Universal Pictures Home Entertainment on May 1 , 2018 .
Madman Entertainment released the film on DVD and Blu - ray in Australia and New Zealand on July 4 , 2018 .
Altitude Film Distribution released the film on DVD , Blu - ray and a Blu - ray Steelbook in the United Kingdom on September 10 , 2018 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Mary and The Witch 's Flower grossed $ 2.4 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 38.6 million in other territories ( including $ 27.6 million in Japan , $ 3.8 million in South Korea , $ 2.9 million in China and $ 2.6 million in France ) , for a worldwide total of $ 41 million .
In Japan , the film opened at second place , grossing ¥ 428 million ( $ 3.9 million ) during its opening weekend ; this was an increase compared to Yonebayashi 's previous film , When Marnie Was There ( 2014 ) , which had grossed ¥ 378.86 million in its first weekend .
In the United States , the film held a special Thursday night preview on January 18 , 2018 where it grossed $ 1.2 million from 573 theaters .
It then stayed at 161 theaters over the weekend and grossed $ 329,097 , bringing its four - day gross to $ 1.5 million .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 87 % based on 78 reviews , and an average rating of 6.9/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Mary and The Witch 's Flower honors its creator 's Studio Ghibli roots with a gentle , beautifully animated story whose simplicity is rounded out by its entrancing visuals . "
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 75 out of 100 , based on 23 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Sheila O'Malley of RogerEbert.com gave the film a rating of three stars out of four and stated that " the total lack of inner conflict in Mary might be why Mary and The Witch 's Flower - as transportive and entertaining as it is - feels a little slight " .
However , Moira Macdonald of The Seattle Times noted that although the film " is n't quite a masterpiece " and " the screenplay needs a polish " , she concluded that the film is " a joy to look at : a visual adventure , and a continuation of a remarkable legacy " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS