MAYANS M.C. Mayans M.C. is an American crime drama television series created by Kurt Sutter and Elgin James that premiered on September 4 , 2018 on FX .
The show takes place in the same fictional universe as Sons of Anarchy and deals with the Sons ' rivals - turned - allies , the Mayans Motorcycle Club .
In October 2018 , it was announced that FX had renewed the series for a second season .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
Mayans M.C. takes place four years after the events of Sons of Anarchy and is set hundreds of miles away in the fictional California border town of Santo Padre .
The series focuses on the struggles of Ezekiel " EZ " Reyes , a prospect in the Mayan M.C. charter on the border .
EZ is the gifted son of a proud Mexican family , whose American dream was snuffed out by cartel violence .
Now , his need for vengeance drives him toward a life he never intended and can never escape .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* J. D. Pardo as Ezekiel " EZ " Reyes , prospect for the Mayans M.C and brother to Angel Reyes .
* Sarah Bolger as Emily Thomas , childhood sweetheart of EZ , who is now married to Miguel Galindo and the mother of their infant son .
* Clayton Cardenas as Angel Reyes , EZ 's brother and full patch member of Mayans M.C. * Michael Irby as Obispo " Bishop " Losa , president of Mayans M.C. 's Santo Padre Charter .
* Carla Baratta as Adelita , who as a child , watched her family die at the hands of the Galindo cartel .
* Richard Cabral as Johnny
" El Coco " Cruz , a full patch member of Mayans M.C. * Raoul Trujillo as Che " Taza " Romero , Vice Presidente of Mayans M.C. , Santo Padre Charter .
* Antonio Jaramillo as Michael " Riz " Ariza , Él Secretario of Mayans M.C. , Santo Padre Charter .
* Danny Pino as Miguel Galindo , the son of Galindo Cartel founder Jose Galindo .
* Edward James Olmos as Felipe Reyes , the once - strong Mexican patriarch and Angel and EZ 's father .
RECURRING
* Emilio Rivera as Marcus Alvarez , President of the Mayans M.C. Oakland Charter , cousin of Obispo " Bishop " Losa , and the national president of the Mayan M.C. * Vincent " Rocco " Vargas as Gilberto " Gilly " Lopez , a good - natured MMA fighter who rides for the Santo Padre Chapter of the Mayans M.C. * Frankie Loyal Delgado as Hank
" El Tranq " Loza , Sergeant At Arms / El pacificador Full Patch Member of the Mayans M.C. * Melony Ochoa as Mini , a child member of Los Olividados who Adelita shares a close relationship with .
* Maurice Compte as Kevin Jimenez , a highly regarded DEA agent tasked to bring down Miguel Galindo , the Galindo Cartel kingpin .
* Tony Plana as Devante , consigliere to the Galindo Cartel that loyally served Jose Galindo and now mentors Miguel .
* Gino Vento as Nestor Oceteva , head of security for the Galindo Cartel and a childhood friend of Miguel Galindo .
* Ada Maris as Dita Galindo , Miguel 's mother and widow of Jose Galindo * Salvador Chacon as Pablo , a member of Los Olividados who serves as the right - hand man of Adelita .
* Alexandra Barreto as Antonia Pena , the mayor of Santo Padre and is married to Katrina .
* Joseph Raymond Lucero as Neron " Creeper " Vargas , an ex - junkie from Los Angeles and road captain of the Santo Padre charter .
* Michael Ornstein as Chuck " Chucky " Marstein
* Ada Luz Pla as Celia , Coco 's manipulative mother who works as a prostitute .
* Emily Tosta as Leticia Cruz , Coco 's daughter who was raised for years believing she was his younger sister .
* Edwin Hodge as Officer Franky Rogan
* Ray McKinnon as Lincoln ' Linc ' James Potter
GUEST
* Robert Patrick as Les Packer ( " Perro / Oc " )
* Peter Navy Tuiasosopo as Afa ( " Perro / Oc " )
* Katey Sagal as Gemma Teller Morrow ( " Perro / Oc " )
* Noel G. as Louie ( " Escorpión / Dzec " )
* Nomi Ruiz as Gracie ( " Escorpión / Dzec " )
* J. Larose as Adam ( " Búho / Muwan " )
* Barbara Williams as Alice Reed ( " Murciélago / Zotz " ) * David Labrava as Happy Lowman ( " Cuervo / Tz'ikb'uul " ) * Rusty Coones as Rane Quinn ( " Cuervo / Tz'ikb'uul " )
EPISODES
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
On May 11 , 2016 , it was announced that FX had begun formal script development on a spinoff of the television series Sons of Anarchy .
The long - rumored offshoot , entitled Mayans M.C. , was created by Kurt Sutter and Elgin James , with James writing the pilot script and both executive producing .
Production companies announced as being involved with the series included Fox 21 Television Studios and FX Productions .
On December 1 , 2016 , FX officially gave the production a pilot order .
It was also announced that Sutter would direct the series ' pilot episode .
On July 5 , 2017 , it was announced that the pilot would be undergoing reshoots and that Norberto Barba would be replacing Sutter as director of the episode as Sutter planned to exclusively focus on the writing of the episode .
Additionally , it was reported that various roles would be recast and that Barba would also be serving as an executive producer .
On January 5 , 2018 , FX announced at the annual Television Critics Association 's winter press tour that the production had been given a series order for a first season consisting of ten episodes .
On June 28 , 2018 , it was reported that the series would premiere on September 4 , 2018 .
On October 1 , 2018 , it was announced that FX had renewed the series for a second season .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
In February 2017 , it was announced that Edward James Olmos , John Ortiz , J. D. Pardo , and Antonio Jaramillo had been cast in lead roles in the pilot .
In March 2017 , it was reported that Richard Cabral , Sarah Bolger , Jacqueline Obradors , and Andrea Londo had also been cast .
In October 2017 , it was announced that Michael Irby and Raoul Trujillo had been cast in series regular roles .
In November 2016 , it was reported that Emilio Rivera would be reprising his role of Marcus Álvarez from Sons of Anarchy in the series .
On April 25 , 2017 , it was announced that Carla Baratta would be replacing Andrea Londo in the role of Adelita .
Additionally , it was reported that Maurice Compte had been cast in a potentially recurring role .
On May 1 , 2017 , it was reported that Efrat Dor would joining the cast in a potentially recurring capacity .
In October 2017 , it was announced that Danny Pino and Vincent " Rocco " Vargas had been cast in the pilot with Pino in a starring role .
In April 2018 , it was announced that Gino Vento and Tony Plana had been cast in recurring roles .
On July 22 , 2018 , Sutter revealed in an interview with Deadline Hollywood that Ortiz and his character had been replaced by Irby and his character during the reshoots of the pilot episode .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography for the pilot episode was expected to begin in March 2017 .
In July 2017 , it was reported that the pilot would undergo reshoots that would take place in late summer 2017 .
Those reshoots reportedly began during the week of October 23 , 2017 in Los Angeles .
RELEASE MARKETING
Section::::Release .
Section::::Marketing .
On May 8 , 2018 , FX released the first teaser trailer for the series .
On July 19 , 2018 , the official trailer was released .
PREMIERE Section::::Premiere .
On June 8 , 2018 , the series held an official world premiere sneak peek at the annual ATX Television Festival in Austin , Texas .
Co - creators Kurt Sutter and Elgin James , executive producer / director Norberto Barba , and cast members took part in the Republic of Texas Motorcycle Rally in downtown Austin .
This was followed by a screening of an exclusive clip from the show and a question - and - answer panel at the Paramount Theatre with guests including producers Sutter , James , and Barba as well cast members such as J. D. Pardo , Clayton Cardenas , Sarah Bolger , Carla Baratta , Richard Cabral , Antonio Jaramillo , Emilio Rivera , Danny Pino , Michael Irby , Vincent " Rocco " Vargas , Raoul Trujillo , and Frankie Loyal .
On July 22 , 2018 , the series held a panel at San Diego Comic - Con in Hall H of the San Diego Convention Center in San Diego , California .
The panel was moderated by Entertainment Weeklys Lynnette Rice and included creators Sutter and James as well as cast member J.D. Pardo .
The panel also included a screening of the first thirteen minutes of the pilot episode .
On August 28 , 2018 , the series held its official premiere at the Grauman 's Chinese Theatre in Los Angeles , California .
Those in attendance included J.D. Pardo , Edward James Olmos , Sarah Bolger , Michael Irby , Clayton Cardenas , Kurt Sutter , Katey Sagal , Raoul Max Trujillo , Danny Pino , Antonio Jaramillo , Richard Cabral , Maurice Compte , Carla Baratta , Emilio Rivera , and Yadi Valeria .
DISTRIBUTION Section::::Distribution .
Mayans M.C. is currently on airing in the following countries and channels :
The series premiered on September 4 , 2018 , on FoxPremium in South America and FXNow in Canada .
It premiered on September 5 , 2018 , on Showcase in Australia , Canal+ in France , Neon in New Zealand , and HBO in Denmark , Norway , Spain , Finland and Sweden .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The series has been met with a mixed to positive response from critics upon its premiere .
On the review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes , the series holds a 71 % approval rating with an average rating of 6.46 out of 10 based on 34 reviews .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Mayans M.C. is a thrilling drama with compelling characters , but it struggles to find its pace and the Tellers are hard to forget . "
On Metacritic , the series has a score of 57 out of 100 , based on 19 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
!
scope="col " Year ! scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Category ! scope="col " Nominee(s ) ! scope="col " Result ! scope="col " class="unsortable " NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS