CANNABIS IN IRELAND
Cannabis in Ireland is illegal for recreational purposes .
Use for medical purposes requires case - by - case approval by the Minister for Health .
A bill to legalise medical uses of cannabis passed second reading in Dáil Éireann ( lower house ) in December 2016 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In the Irish Free State , cannabis and cannabis resin were first prohibited by the Dangerous Drugs Act 1934 , which came into force on 1 April 1937 .
The 1934 act replaced the Dangerous Drugs Act 1920 ( a UK act passed before the Free State 's creation ) and fulfilled the state 's obligations under the 1925 revision of the International Opium Convention , which had added Indian hemp to the list of controlled substances , and which was ratified by the Free State in 1931 .
Cannabis use increased from the late 1960s .
In 1968 the government set up a Working Party on Drug Abuse , whose 1971 report recommended keeping " the legal and medical status of cannabis " under review , and that possession of " a small amount of cannabis " for personal use should not be punished by imprisonment .
The recommendation to place cannabis in a separate legal category from other narcotics was included in the Misuse of Drugs Act 1977 , which replaced the 1934 act , and remains in force .
ENFORCEMENT Section::::Enforcement .
The gardaí ( Irish police ) have a level of discretion when dealing with recreational cannabis users .
To procure a conviction any cannabis seized has to be sent for analysis to the Garda Forensic Science Laboratory .
This , along with the time needed to process the arrest , means that individual gardaí may decide not to arrest for small amounts , but the drug will be seized and the name of the individual will be taken .
Possession of cannabis is an arrestable offense and in 2003 , 53 per cent of all drug seizures and 70 per cent of all drug - related prosecutions were for cannabis .
Trafficking or possession with intent to supply are serious offenses under Irish law .
75 % of drug cases before the criminal courts are for simple possession .
This accounted for 11,486 of the convictions in 2016 .
On being brought to court , the penalties for possession are outlined as follows :
* First offence :
On summary conviction , to a fine not exceeding € 381 , or on conviction on indictment , to a fine not exceeding € 635 .
*
Second offence :
On summary conviction , to a fine not exceeding € 508 , or on conviction on indictment , to a fine not exceeding € 1,269 .
* Third or subsequent offence :
On summary conviction , to a fine not exceeding € 1,269 or , at the discretion of the court , to imprisonment for a term not exceeding twelve months , or to both the fine and the imprisonment , or on conviction on indictment , to a fine of such amount as the court considers appropriate or , at the discretion of the court , to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years , or to both the fine and the imprisonment .
There is no law against possession or sale of cannabis seeds .
MEDICAL USE Section::::Medical use .
The 1998 regulations under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1977 ( as amended ) listed cannabis , cannabis resin , cannabinol and its derivatives as schedule 1 drugs .
For such drugs , manufacture , production , preparation , sale , supply , distribution and possession is unlawful for any purpose , except under licence from the Minister for Health .
Licences were granted to GW Pharmaceuticals in 2002 and 2003 to allow medical trials of the cannabis extract nabiximols ( Sativex ) in a county Cork hospice and Waterford Regional Hospital .
In 2014 , the 1998 regulations were amended to allow nabiximols to be prescribed by excepting it from schedule 1 .
The first licence for medical use of cannabis oil was issued in December 2016 to allow Tristan Forde a two - year - old boy with Dravet syndrome to continue treatment begun in Colorado .
This was issued by the minister after an application by the boy 's physician .
REFORM
Section::::Reform .
Luke ' Ming ' Flanagan , a longstanding pro - cannabis campaigner , was elected to the 31st Dáil in the 2011 general election as an independent Teachta Dála for Roscommon – South Leitrim .
On 6 November 2013 , he proposed a motion " That Dáil Éireann calls on the Government to introduce legislation to regulate the cultivation , sale and possession of cannabis and cannabis products in Ireland " , which was defeated by 111 votes to 8 .
On 20 November 2013 , he introduced a private member 's bill , the Cannabis Regulation Bill 2013 , which never got a second reading .
In November 2015 , Aodhán Ó Ríordáin , the Minister of State responsible for the National Drugs Strategy , said he favoured decriminalising cannabis , cocaine and heroin for personal use .
Ó Ríordáin lost his seat at the 2016 election .
In December 2016 , a private member 's bill was introduced by Gino Kenny of People Before Profit to make cannabis available in Ireland for medicinal use .
It passed second stage without a vote .
The bill progressed to the amendments stage on 9 November 2017 .
One of the major organisations campaigning for the legalisation of cannabis in Ireland is NORML Ireland . '
NORML Ireland supports the removal of all penalties for the private possession of cannabis by adults , cultivation for personal use , and the casual nonprofit transfers of small amounts .
NORML Ireland also supports the development of a legally controlled market for cannabis ' .
In June 2018 , after a bill was passed to legalise cannabis in Canada , Taoiseach Leo Varadkar stated that the decriminalisation of cannabis was ' under consideration ' , with an expert group considering the examining the systems in jurisdictions in which cannabis has been decriminalised for recreational use .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* NORML Ireland REFERENCES