MARVEL VS .
CAPCOM :
INFINITE Infinite was announced during Sony 's PlayStation Experience event in December 2016 .
Capcom initially lost the use of the Marvel license in 2012 , after The Walt Disney Company decided to focus on self - publishing its own gaming titles ; however , Capcom was able to reacquire the license after Disney dissolved its console publishing division .
Infinite was designed to be more accessible than previous Marvel vs. Capcom games , resulting in several changes to the series ' traditional mechanics .
The game also features a larger emphasis on storytelling , with the series ' first cinematic story mode .
The plot follows the heroes of the Marvel and Capcom universes , who must work together to save their merged worlds against a new threat , Ultron Sigma .
Infinite was released in September 2017 for PlayStation 4 , Xbox One , and Microsoft Windows .
The game received mixed reviews ; critics praised its new gameplay elements , but criticized its presentation , particularly its art direction , and character roster .
The game also underperformed commercially .
Capcom originally expected the game to sell two million units ; however , it missed its sales target , selling approximately one million copies by the end of December 2017 .
GAMEPLAY Section::::Gameplay .
Like its predecessors , Marvel vs. Capcom : Infinite is a 2D fighting game in which players compete against each other in tag team combat using characters from both the Marvel Comics and Capcom universes .
Players must knock out the opposing team by repeatedly attacking the opponent and draining their health bar .
Infinite features two - on - two partner battles , similar to and earlier installments in the franchise .
Unlike past entries , the game does not allow players to use traditional call - in assist attacks from off - screen characters ; instead , Infinite utilizes a " free - form " tag system , known as " Active Switch " , which shares similarities with " Team Aerial Combo " system and Street Fighter X Tekken " Switch Cancel " system .
Players can immediately switch between their team members at any point , even while mid - air or during attack animations .
This provides players with the abilities to create their own offensive or defensive assists through the tag system and form continuous combos between their two characters .
As with previous Marvel vs. Capcom titles , players will charge their " Hyper Combo Gauge " as their characters deal or receive damage during the fight .
Players can then expend the accrued meter from their Hyper Combo Gauge to perform " Hyper Combos " , cinematic attacks which deal larger amounts of damage to the opponent .
Alternatively , players can sacrifice meter from their Hyper Combo Gauge to perform the newly introduced " Counter Switch " mechanic , which tags in their partner character while the opponent is attacking them .
This provides players with the opportunity to counterattack and free the character trapped in the enemy 's combo .
The Hyper Combo Gauge in Infinite is limited to four bars of meter , as opposed to the five - bar maximum used in Marvel vs. Capcom 2 and 3 .
Infinite moves away from the button layout previously used in Marvel vs. Capcom 3 , and instead employs a control scheme more similar to Marvel vs. Capcom 2 , which includes four attack buttons , consisting of two pairs of light and heavy punches and kicks , and two additional buttons used for swapping characters and activating Infinity Stone powers .
To improve accessibility , the game includes an " auto - combo " system which allows players to repeatedly press the light punch button to automatically perform both ground and air combos .
In addition , certain Hyper Combos can now be activated by simply pressing the two heavy attack buttons , as opposed to the specific joystick and button combinations required in previous titles .
Infinite also implements the Infinity Stones as a gameplay mechanic , similar to Marvel Super Heroes , where each stone grants unique abilities .
Before the match begins , players select one of the six Infinity Stones .
Each Infinity Stone bestows one ability that can be activated at any time , known as the " Infinity Surge " .
For example , the Power Stone produces a knockback effect when used , while the Space Stone pulls an opponent closer to the player character .
A second , stronger ability called the " Infinity Storm " can be activated after players fill their Infinity meter at least halfway , giving them a significant boost for a limited time , similar to the X - Factor system from Marvel vs. Capcom 3 .
The boost is determined by the chosen Infinity Stone ; for example , the Power Stone increases the user 's damage output and combo ability , while the Space Stone traps an opponent within a confined area that severely limits their movement .
The game offers various offline and online single - player and multiplayer game modes .
The offline features include Story Mode , a two - hour cinematic story campaign ; Arcade Mode , a classic arcade game experience where players fight against several AI - controlled opponents before confronting the final boss characters Ultron Sigma and Ultron Omega ; Mission Mode , where players can complete tutorial missions and character - specific challenges ; Training Mode , where players can practice their fighting abilities and adjust various training field parameters ; Versus Player 2 , where two players can battle against each other locally ; Versus CPU , where players can battle solo against an AI - controlled opponent ; and Collection Mode , where extras unlocked through gameplay are stored , including story cutscenes , character and stage information , concept artwork , and audio tracks .
Online multiplayer includes ranked and casual matches , global leaderboards , replays , and eight - player lobbies with spectating .
The online mode also introduces the Beginners League , a special league designated for low - ranking players to compete for graduation into higher ranks .
PLAYABLE CHARACTERS
Section::::Playable characters .
Marvel vs. Capcom :
Infinite features a base roster of 30 playable characters , consisting of both new and returning heroes and villains in the Marvel vs. Capcom series .
Additional characters were also released post - launch as downloadable content ( DLC ) .
New characters to the franchise are listed below in bold . !
colspan="2 " Marvel characters !
colspan="2 " Capcom characters * Black Panther
*
Black Widow
*
Captain America *
Captain Marvel * Doctor Strange * Dormammu * Gamora * Ghost Rider * Hawkeye
* Hulk * Iron Man
*
Nova
* Rocket Raccoon * Spider - Man * Thanos
* Thor
* Ultron
* Venom * Winter Soldier
*
Arthur
* Chris Redfield
* Chun - Li *
Dante * Firebrand * Frank West * Jedah Dohma * Mike Haggar
* Monster Hunter * Morrigan Aensland
* Nathan Spencer
* Nemesis
* Ryu * Sigma
* Strider Hiryu * X
* Zero PLOT Section::::Plot .
Death is visited by Jedah Dohma , who proposes an alliance to achieve equilibrium between life and death on both their worlds .
Needing the six Infinity Stones to do so , Death deceives Thanos and Ultron into aiding her , granting Thanos the Space Stone and sending Ultron to retrieve the Reality Stone from Abel City .
Sigma intercepts Ultron , and the two forge an alliance .
They betray the others and use the Space and Reality Stones to merge the two dimensions and fuse themselves into a single being named " Ultron Sigma " .
To wipe out biological life , they begin unleashing an evolved form of the Sigma Virus that turns organic creatures into synthetic beings under their control .
An alliance of heroes from both worlds is then formed .
They rescue Thanos from Ultron Sigma 's imprisonment and secure him in a containment field at Avengers Tower .
To gain their trust , Thanos reveals the locations of the remaining four Infinity Stones , and teams of heroes are dispatched to find them .
Ryu , Chun - Li , Captain America , and Hulk travel to Valkanda to obtain the Time Stone .
Despite Captain America 's warnings , Black Panther , the ruler of Valkanda , refuses to surrender it .
Ultron Sigma 's drones arrive and spread the virus , infecting a Dah'ren Mohran .
After Ryu and Hulk defeat the creature , Panther agrees to give them the Stone .
Next , Dante , Morrigan , Ghost Rider , Arthur , and Doctor Strange travel to the Dark Kingdom , where they encounter Jedah , who is using the Soul Stone to feed souls to a Symbiote creature , hoping to use it against Ultron Sigma .
While the heroes battle Dormammu and Firebrand , Jedah escapes with the Stone .
Meanwhile , Iron Man sends Spider - Man to assist Chris Redfield in infiltrating an A.I.M.brella facility .
There , they find Frank West and Mike Haggar , and discover M.O.D.O.K. turning people into bio - organic weapons , infused with Symbiotes at Jedah 's demand .
The heroes defeat M.O.D.O.K. 's enforcer , Nemesis , and retrieve the Mind Stone .
However , they are soon attacked by Jedah and his giant Symbiote .
On Knowmoon , Captain Marvel , Rocket Raccoon , Gamora , Nova , Strider Hiryu , and X defeat Ultron Sigma 's ally , Grandmaster Meio , and rescue Zero from his control .
Upon taking the Power Stone , the station ejects its core , which falls towards New Metro City carrying a massive Sigma Virus payload .
While Doctor Light , Iron Man , Nathan Spencer , and Hawkeye build a weapon to harness the Infinity Stones , Ultron Sigma attacks Avengers Tower .
In the chaos , Thanos is released and attacks Ultron Sigma , cracking the Reality Stone and forcing them to retreat .
The heroes use their Stones to destroy the Symbiote and the falling core , but are infected in the process .
The infected heroes then head for Xgard to infiltrate Sigma 's laboratory to finish their weapon , the Infinity Buster .
When Thanos learns of Death and Jedah 's partnership , he becomes enraged and betrays the heroes , creating a mechanized gauntlet that absorbs Ryu 's Satsui no Hadō before departing for revenge .
After reclaiming the Soul Stone from Jedah , Dante arrives in Xgard and pretends to surrender the Stone .
Since they have no souls , Ultron Sigma is overwhelmed by the Stone and transforms into Ultron Omega .
The Infinity Buster is installed into X , who uses it to destroy Ultron Omega .
In the aftermath , the virus is neutralized , but since the Reality Stone was cracked , the universes can not be separated again .
The heroes agree to protect the new world and split the Infinity Stones between them to keep them safe .
In a post - credits scene , Jedah tells Death that he has another plan , but Thanos arrives seeking vengeance against them .
Believing the Satsui no Hadō is capable of killing immortals like Death and Jedah , he prepares to attack them with a Gohadouken .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Following the release of Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 for the PlayStation Vita in 2012 , Marvel 's new parent company , The Walt Disney Company , which acquired Marvel in 2009 , chose not to renew their licensing deal with Capcom , instead opting to move its viable properties towards their self - published game titles , such as the Disney Infinity series ; this resulted in Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 , and Marvel vs. Capcom Origins being removed from the Xbox Live Arcade and PlayStation Network in 2013 .
However , in May 2016 , Disney announced its decision to discontinue self - publishing efforts and switch over to a licensing - only model , allowing third - party game developers , including Capcom , to negotiate licenses with Marvel once again .
On December 3 , 2016 , Marvel vs. Capcom : Infinite was officially unveiled during Sony 's PlayStation Experience event ; its first gameplay footage debuted on the same day following the conclusion of Capcom Cup 2016 .
Norio Hirose , a programmer who had previously worked on X - Men vs. Street Fighter , Marvel Super Heroes vs. Street Fighter , and , as well as other Capcom fighting games , such as Project Justice and , served as Infinites director .
Game development involved Capcom Japan , Capcom USA , and Marvel Games .
According to Mike Jones , Executive Producer at Marvel Games , Infinite was designed to be a " more elegant and simplified " game which remained as " complex and hardcore " as past Marvel vs. Capcom installments .
While the developers sought to keep the core elements of the series intact , such as air combos , they also wanted Infinite to push away from its predecessors , resulting in several changes to the series ' traditional formula .
The decision to change the three - on - three battle system used in Marvel vs. Capcom 2 and 3 was considered for a long time before ultimately settling on two - on - two fights for the sake of accessibility .
Producer Mike Evans hoped that introducing a more manageable two - character system would give casual Marvel vs. Capcom fans the ability to play the game without becoming overwhelmed .
To offset the streamlined character select system and removal of call - in assist attacks , the six Infinity Stones were implemented to provide teams with additional customization options and increase gameplay depth .
Marvel and Capcom compared the Infinity Stones to the " Groove System " used in Capcom vs. SNK 2 .
The primary goal with the Infinity Stones was to create a level playing field by acting as a comeback enabler , and allowing players to compensate for their characters ' deficiencies and enhance their strong points .
According to developers , the inclusion of the Infinity Stones and the theme of " infinite [ gameplay ] possibilities " influenced their decision to use Marvel vs. Capcom :
Infinite as the game 's title , rather than Marvel vs. Capcom 4 .
To further differentiate Infinite , the developers opted to use the Unreal Engine 4 to develop more cinematic and modern visuals , as opposed to the stylized art direction used in Marvel vs. Capcom 3 .
According to Producer Evans and Associate Producer Peter Rosas , the development team examined the strengths and weaknesses of each returning character and adjusted them by providing new moves and abilities , hoping to make every fighter viable .
In terms of roster selection , characters were chosen based on two aspects : their potential interactions within the story and their gameplay style .
The developers sought to include a variety of different character archetypes , from small , nimble characters , such as Strider Hiryu , to large , brawler - type characters , such as the Hulk .
The Marvel characters ' designs were proposed by Capcom 's research and development team in Japan , who took inspiration from both the characters ' comic book and film appearances .
Marvel staff members worked closely with the team , providing feedback to maintain the authenticity of their characters ' portrayals .
While speaking at E3 2017 , Evans explained how they picked the roster based on which characters Marvel was currently pushing or planning to push in the future .
Beyond appealing to genre and series fans , Capcom sought to target a diverse audience with Infinite and bring in casual players who were fans of Marvel 's movies , comic books , and television shows .
To this end , the developers wanted to introduce a more robust , cinematic story compared to previous Marvel vs. Capcom titles .
Bill Rosemann , Creative Director at Marvel Games , stated that Infinites increased emphasis on storytelling was influenced by Marvel 's story and character - centric approach to their recent projects in games , film , and television ; Rosemann and Jones cited Insomniac Games ' Spider - Man video game , Telltale Games ' title , and Marvel 's successful Netflix series as examples .
While speaking at the 2017 D.I.C.E. Summit , Rosemann also explained that Marvel Games would not force its development partners to tie their games into existing storylines throughout Marvel 's universes , giving them more freedom to craft their own original stories and create new visions for their characters .
Infinite 's story mode script was penned by writer Paul Gardner , with oversight from Rosemann and Marvel 's gaming division .
Gardner first became involved with the project beginning in 2015 and finished writing the script in 2016 .
Marvel provided feedback to Capcom on the revisions , animations , music , and presentation of the overall story mode experience .
Frank Tieri , the lead writer for Marvel vs. Capcom 3 , has also confirmed his involvement with Infinite .
According to developers , Capcom 's struggle with the launch of Street Fighter V influenced several decisions during Infinites development .
The heavy criticism towards Street Fighter Vs lack of content prompted Capcom to promise a larger variety of single - player and multiplayer content for Infinite upon release .
As a result of Street Fighter Vs initial online multiplayer server issues , the developers plan to forgo their own servers in favor of dedicated servers by Sony and Microsoft , aiming to provide more stable online play for Infinite .
The game does not feature cross - platform play , with Evans citing Capcom 's trouble with implementing the Capcom Fighters Network cross - platform structure into Street Fighter V. Infinite also does not include any currency systems similar to Street Fighter
Vs " Fight Money " .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Marvel vs. Capcom : Infinite was released for the PlayStation 4 , Xbox One and Microsoft Windows , on September 19 , 2017 , in North America and Europe , and September 21 , 2017 , in Japan .
The game was available in three editions : a standard edition , a Deluxe Edition , and a Collector 's Edition .
Pre - orders for the standard edition include the Evil Ryu and Warrior Thor alternate in - game costumes .
Pre - orders for the Deluxe Edition include the Evil Ryu , Warrior Thor , Gladiator Hulk and alternate costumes , in addition to the " 2017 Character Pass " .
The Collector 's Edition , which includes the Deluxe Edition and its pre - order incentives , features four character dioramas of Iron Man , Captain Marvel , Mega Man X and Chun - Li by TriForce , and a case filled with six LED - powered Infinity Stone replicas .
The Major Carol Danvers alternate costume was also packaged exclusively with the PlayStation 4 version .
A story mode demo was released on June 12 , 2017 , following Sony 's press conference at the Electronic Entertainment Expo .
On February 27 , 2018 , Infinite was listed on the Microsoft Store as an Xbox Play
Anywhere title .
To coincide with the game 's release , Capcom announced their first global tournament series for Infinite called Battle for the Stones .
In addition to extending special invitations to the Evolution Championship Series ' seven Marvel vs. Capcom 3 champions , Capcom selected six community events to act as " Infinity Stone Tournaments " .
The winner of each event , in addition to qualifying for the Battle for the Stones finals , received an Infinity Stone that could be used to gain a unique advantage during the competition .
For example , the Space Stone allowed its bearer to swap their position within the tournament bracket to face a different opponent , while the Mind Stone allowed its bearer to pick their opponent 's team .
Fellow competitors could steal Infinity Stones by successfully defeating their current owners .
Capcom also held three regional online tournaments to fill out the remaining bracket spots .
The finals were held in Anaheim , California on December 9–10 , 2017 , and included a prize pool .
The winner of the tournament was Jonathan " Cloud805 " Morales , who received and an Infinity Gauntlet trophy .
DOWNLOADABLE CONTENT Section::::Downloadable content .
The " 2017 Character Pass " includes six DLC fighters : Black Panther , Black Widow , Monster Hunter , Sigma , Venom , and Winter Soldier .
Black Panther , Monster Hunter , and Sigma were released on October 17 , 2017 , while Black Widow , Venom , and Winter Soldier were released on December 5 , 2017 .
Players could also obtain the Superior Spider - Man alternate costume by pre - ordering through the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One online stores before October 24 , 2017 .
On October 17 , 2017 , Capcom released three themed costume packs , each containing six outfits : the Avenging Army Pack ( Iron Man , Hawkeye , Thor , Dante , Spencer , Arthur ) , the World Warriors Pack ( Captain America , Captain Marvel , Hulk , Chris , Ryu , Chun - Li ) , and the Mystic Masters Pack ( Doctor Strange , Dormammu , Ghost Rider , Morrigan , Firebrand , Nemesis ) .
The costumes can also be purchased individually or altogether with the " Premium Costume Pass " .
The Premium Costume Pass gives players additional access to the Stone Seekers Pack ( Spider - Man , Ultron , Thanos , Jedah , Frank , Haggar ) and the Cosmic Crusaders Pack ( Rocket Raccoon , Gamora , Nova , Strider Hiryu , X , Zero ) , which were released on December 5 , 2017 .
RELATED MEDIA Section::::Related media .
In February 2017 , Hasbro announced a Marvel vs. Capcom :
Infinite toy line during their presentation at the American International Toy Fair .
In May 2017 , Marvel announced a series of Marvel vs. Capcom - themed comic book variant covers , which became available in comic stores throughout August .
In September 2017 , Marvel revealed a new wave of Funko Pop !
collectibles , featuring the playable cast from Infinite in their premium alternate costumes .
The collectibles were released in November 2017 .
RECEPTION PRE - RELEASE Section::::Reception . Section::::Pre - release .
In pre - release coverage , Infinites departure from some of the series ' long - standing gameplay mechanics , namely three - on - three battles and character assist moves , for the sake of accessibility was met with mixed reception .
Suriel Vazquez of Game Informer and Wesley Yin - Poole of Eurogamer stated that Infinite could end up being a divisive game , especially to the hardcore audience , since both mechanics had defined the Marvel vs. Capcom series for nearly two decades .
The issue was mirrored by IGN Daniel Krupa , who mentioned that the shifts in the series ' formula could lead to a feeling among fans that their game was being " diluted " for newer players .
Vazquez and Krupa , however , appreciated the changes , with Vazquez saying that he preferred the series " go for broke " , rather than play it safe .
GamesRadar David Houghton and Kotaku 's Ian Walker gave positive remarks in their impressions of the press preview build , with both praising the development team 's attempt to create an accessible environment for newcomers while also pleasing the competitive community .
Early criticism was directed at Infinite less stylized art direction .
Alex Donaldson of VG247 stated that " the art style just feels off — or at worst , unfinished ... as it stands right now
the art style is a mistake when compared to Marvel vs. Capcom 3 . "
Sergio Figueroa of Gamereactor and Nick Valdez of Destructoid also expressed disappointment with the visuals , particularly the in - game character models and the HUD .
Figueroa wrote that " the developers have chosen a simplistic and , in our opinion , insufficiently detailed character design that we think diminishes the fighters ' personalities .
" The release of the story mode demo was also criticized .
Polygon David Cabrera felt the demo was a " squandered opportunity " by Capcom that " actively [ hid ] the good points of the game and [ highlighted ] its failings , " such as unpolished character models and awkward voice acting , while Game Informer 's Ben Reeves thought the demo lacked entertaining moments and failed to showcase Marvel and Capcom 's " dream matchups " in any meaningful or creative way .
Following complaints about the quality of certain character models , particularly on the Capcom side of the roster , the developers announced plans for a day - one patch that would focus on artistic improvements .
POST - RELEASE Section::::Post - release .
Marvel vs. Capcom : Infinite was released to mixed to positive reviews , according to Metacritic , which provided aggregated scores of 77 , 72 , and 69 for the Xbox One , PlayStation 4 , and Microsoft Windows versions , respectively .
The game received praise for its gameplay , including its changes to the series ' traditional tag team system and the addition of the Infinity Stones .
GameSpot Tamoor Hussain complimented the developers for simplifying tagging without sacrificing gameplay depth .
He appreciated the game 's more open - ended fighting systems , comparing Infinite to " a blank canvas " and its mechanics " as the brushes for painting your unique superhero squad . "
Polygon Chelsea Stark and Jeff Ramos also praised the revised core mechanics , saying that the new tag system opened more options for clever combo creation .
Similarly , IGN Darry Huskey was impressed by the game 's willingness to " completely [ upend ] traditions fans have known since X - Men vs. Street Fighter in 1996 " by overhauling time - honored game mechanics , such as the assist system .
Additionally , Huskey described the decision to replace each team 's third character with an Infinity Stone as the " crown jewel " of Infinite 's design , claiming that it " works so well , it makes the very idea of a three - character team now seem like old news .
"
Game Informer Ben Reeves wrote that the streamlined fighting system and the inclusions of automatic combos and simplified super attacks would allow newcomers " to feel right at home . "
Reviewers frequently criticized the game for its presentation .
Huskey labeled the character design as " distractingly bad and stiff " , and found the orchestral soundtrack to be " forgettable and easily ignored . "
Stark and Ramos proclaimed that the aesthetics were " the stalest the franchise has ever seen " , and compared the user interface to " placeholder graphics that were never changed for the final product . "
Destructoid Chris Carter also loathed the visuals , describing the art style as " a crime against humanity . "
GamesRadar Sam Prell felt that Infinite 's presentation , in comparison to " the flashy cel - shaded art direction and over - the - top tone of Marvel vs. Capcom 3 " and " the silky smooth sprites and technical precision of Marvel vs. Capcom 2 , " made the game fall " hopelessly short ... in the shadow of its own pedigree . "
Eurogamer Wesley Yin - Poole reproached the art style , calling it a " desperate attempt to appeal to fans of Marvel 's all - encompassing cinematic universe " and " an abomination of a look that neither appeals to movie nor comic book fans . "
GameCentral for Metro faulted the game for its " bland visuals " , " drab menus " , and " uniformly dull backdrops . "
Infinite was also criticized for its playable roster , which was smaller than the previous installment , Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 , and recycled many of its characters .
VentureBeat Mike Minotti expressed his disappointment with the game 's smaller selection of fighters , especially compared to its predecessors , and the meager amount of newcomers .
Yin - Poole pointed out the lack of diversity in the roster , particularly the lack of playable female characters .
GameCentral stated that the roster " smacks of laziness and/or a lack of budget " and suspected that most of the final roster decisions were made by lawyers and marketing people .
The omission of characters from the X - Men and Fantastic Four franchises was also chastised by critics , who speculated that the then - ongoing legal dispute between The Walt Disney Company , Marvel Studios , and 20th Century Fox over their film rights was the main motive behind their exclusion .
Prell and Yin - Poole both lamented the lack of X - Men characters , highlighting the franchise 's significance in establishing the Marvel vs. Capcom series .
The latter declared their omission as " a dagger in the heart of every [ Marvel vs. Capcom ] fan - one that there is no recovering from . "
The game was nominated for " Best Fighting Game of E3 2017 " by the Game Critics Awards , but lost to Dragon Ball FighterZ.
It also received " Best Fighting Game of 2017
" nominations by IGN , The Game Awards , and the 21st Annual D.I.C.E. Awards , but lost to Injustice 2 .
In addition , it received nominations for " Control Precision " and " Game , Franchise Fighting " at the 17th Annual National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers Awards , but lost to Cuphead and Tekken 7 , respectively .
SALES Section::::Sales .
According to their sales plans for the fiscal year ending on March 31 , 2018 , Capcom expected Marvel vs. Capcom :
Infinite to sell two million units worldwide .
The game saw poor first - week sales in the United Kingdom , debuting at # 12 on the all - formats chart .
The PlayStation 4 version peaked at # 16 in the individual formats chart , while the Xbox One version failed to reach the Top 40 .
In Japan , the PlayStation 4 version ranked # 8 on the Media Create sales chart after its first week , selling 8,273 copies ; the Xbox One version did not make it into the Top 20 .
This marked a significant drop from the 80,966 units Marvel vs. Capcom 3 : Fate of Two Worlds had sold in a similar time period .
The game reached # 6 in Australia and # 7 in New Zealand for its first week .
It ranked # 6 in the United States ' list of top - selling games for September 2017 , and # 19 in the US PlayStation Store 's September download charts .
In its first half report of the fiscal year ending on March 31 , 2018 , Capcom reported that over 900,000 units had been shipped in the period ending September 30 , 2017 .
In its third quarter report of the fiscal year ending on March 31 , 2018 , Capcom disclosed that Infinite had sold one million units as of December 31 , 2017 , missing its initial sales target .
In their 2018 integrated report , Capcom described sales for Infinite as weak , stating " Marvel vs. Capcom : Infinite delivered a certain level of sales , primarily overseas owing to deep - rooted popularity , but underperformed overall . "
REFERENCES Notes Footnotes EXTERNAL LINKS