GODZILLA : KING OF THE MONSTERS ( 2019 FILM )
Godzilla : King of the Monsters is an upcoming American monster film directed and co - written by Michael Dougherty .
It is a sequel to Godzilla ( 2014 ) and will be the 35th film in the Godzilla franchise , the third film in Legendary 's MonsterVerse , and the third Godzilla film to be completely produced by a Hollywood studio .
The film stars Kyle Chandler , Vera Farmiga , Millie Bobby Brown , Bradley Whitford , Sally Hawkins , Charles Dance , Thomas Middleditch , O'Shea Jackson Jr. , Ken Watanabe , and Zhang Ziyi .
It is one of Yoshimitsu Banno 's last films as executive producer , as he died on May 7 , 2017 .
The sequel was green - lit during the opening weekend of Godzilla , with original director Gareth Edwards expected to return .
After Edwards left the project in May 2016 , Dougherty , who had been hired in October 2016 to re - write the script with Zach Shields , was announced as the director in January 2017 .
Principal photography began in June 2017 in Atlanta and ended in September 2017 .
Godzilla : King of the Monsters is scheduled to be released on May 31 , 2019 , in 2D , 3D , Dolby Cinema and IMAX .
A sequel , Godzilla vs. Kong , is scheduled to follow up on May 22 , 2020 .
PREMISE CAST * Kyle Chandler as Mark Russell :
* Vera Farmiga as Dr. Emma Russell : * Millie Bobby Brown as Madison Russell :
* Ken Watanabe as Dr. Ishiro Serizawa :
* Sally Hawkins as Dr. Vivienne Graham :
* Bradley Whitford as Dr. Stanton
* Charles Dance * Thomas Middleditch as Sam Coleman :
* O'Shea Jackson Jr. as Barnes :
* Zhang Ziyi as Dr. Chen : Section::::Cast .
Additionally , David Strathairn reprises his role as Admiral William Stenz .
Anthony Ramos portrays Corporal Martinez , and Jonathan Howard portrays Asher , while Aisha Hinds , Elizabeth Ludlow and Randy Havens appear in undisclosed roles .
CCH Pounder plays a senator .
Jason Liles , Alan Maxson and Richard Dorton portray the heads of King Ghidorah via performance capture .
Liles also portrays Rodan via performance capture .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Production credits * Michael Dougherty – director , co - writer * Zach Shields – co - writer , executive producer * Barry H. Waldman – executive producer
* Dan Lin – executive producer * Roy Lee – executive producer * Yoshimitsu Banno – executive producer ( posthumous ) * Kenji Okuhira – executive producer
* Alexandra Mendes – co - producer * Jay Ashenfelter – co - producer * Scott Chambliss – production designer * Louise Mingenbach – costume designer
* Guillaume Rocheron – VFX supervisor * Tom Woodruff Jr. – effects and creature designer DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Gareth Edwards , the director of 2014 's Godzilla , stated that he wanted Godzilla to work as a standalone film with a definitive ending , and he opposed suggestions that the ending should leave the film open for a sequel .
He said that he had no problem coming back to do a sequel if the film did well , but his main concern was delivering a satisfying experience with the current film , " I want a story that begins and ends , and you leave on a high note .
That 's all we cared about when we were making this ; just this film .
If this film is good , the others can come , but let 's just pay attention to this and not get sidetracked by other things . "
After a successful opening of $ 103 million internationally , Legendary green - lit the Godzilla sequel with plans to produce a trilogy and Edwards attached to direct .
At the San Diego Comic - Con in July 2014 , Legendary confirmed that they had acquired the rights to Mothra , Rodan , and King Ghidorah from Toho .
A short teaser clip showing concept art of all three with the ending tagline " Let them fight " was shown .
Other details of their appearances in either of the two sequels were not announced .
In the fall of 2014 , Legendary announced that the sequel would be released on June 8 , 2018 , and that writer Max Borenstein would return to write the screenplay .
In April 2015 , Aaron Taylor - Johnson stated that he was unsure if he would reprise his role for the sequel and that his return depended on Edwards ' decision .
In October 2015 , Legendary announced plans to unite Godzilla and King Kong in a film titled Godzilla vs. Kong , set for a 2020 release date .
Legendary plans to create a shared cinematic franchise " centered around Monarch " that " brings together Godzilla and ... King Kong in an ecosystem of other giant super - species , both classic and new .
"
While Legendary will maintain its home at Universal Pictures , it will continue to collaborate with Warner Bros. for the franchise .
In May 2016 , Warner Bros. announced that Godzilla 2 would be pushed back from its original June 2018 release date to March 22 , 2019 .
That same month , Warner Bros. revealed that Edwards had left the sequel to work on smaller scale projects .
Edwards also felt that Legendary " needed to get on with things " instead of waiting for him to finish work on Rogue One .
In October 2016 , it was revealed that Michael Dougherty and Zach Shields ( both of whom worked on Krampus ) would write the screenplay for Godzilla 2 .
A day later , it was reported that Dougherty was also in negotiations to direct Godzilla 2 .
That same month , Legendary announced that production would also take place at parent company Wanda 's Qingdao Movie Metropolis facility in Qingdao , China , along with Pacific Rim Uprising .
In December 2016 , Legendary revealed that the official title for Godzilla 2 would be Godzilla : King of the Monsters .
In January 2017 , Dougherty was officially confirmed as the director .
Dougherty described the film as : While Dougherty loved Gareth Edwards 's slow - build , Dougherty revealed that his film will " definitely take the gloves off for this film .
No holding back . "
WRITING Section::::Writing .
In September 2014 , it was revealed that Max Borenstein would return to write the script .
Borenstein later spoke about the sequel , stating , " The response to the first film was really exciting , but now that that world is established , we can do bigger and even better things . "
While promoting , Borenstein mentioned that one thing he aimed to do in the Godzilla sequel is make Godzilla more empathetic for the audience , referencing the end of the first film , " When [ Godzilla ] blows his blue flame down the throat of the other creature – a creature we never empathized with in any way – we 're empathizing with Godzilla .
That 's the thing about the movie that I 'm most proud of , and I think Gareth did an amazing job pulling that off .
I think that 's what sets up our Godzilla franchise in a way that the second Godzilla movie can pick up on to begin to make Godzilla a more relatable , emphatic figure .
But it needed that groundwork because you do n't immediately invest emotionally in something that looks like a giant dragon or lizard . "
PRE - PRODUCTION Section::::Pre - production .
In late January 2017 , Millie Bobby Brown was the first to be cast for the film , marking it her feature film debut .
In February 2017 , Kyle Chandler and Vera Farmiga were cast as the parents to Brown 's character .
In March 2017 , it was reported that O'Shea Jackson Jr. was in talks for a role in the film .
In April 2017 , Aisha Hinds was confirmed to join the cast of the film .
In May 2017 , Anthony Ramos , Randy Havens , Thomas Middleditch , and Charles Dance were added to the cast , and Sally Hawkins was confirmed to return .
At the time , Ken Watanabe was named but not yet been confirmed to return but later , a press release confirmed Watanabe 's return for the sequel .
In June 2017 , Bradley Whitford and Zhang Ziyi were added to the cast , with the latter playing a " major role " in the MonsterVerse .
In July 2017 , Elizabeth Ludlow was added to the cast .
In April 2018 , Jason Liles , Alan Maxson , and Richard Dorton were cast to provide the performance capture for the heads of King Ghidorah , with Dorton performing the left head , Liles performing the middle head , and Maxson performing the right head .
Other actors will perform the body .
Liles also provided the performance capture for Rodan .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography began on June 19 , 2017 , in Atlanta , Georgia under the working title Fathom .
Dougherty confirmed that the film would feature practical effects and creature designs by Tom Woodruff ,
Jr. A casting call confirmed that the film will feature Rodan , Mothra , and King Ghidorah .
Lawrence Sher has been confirmed as director of photography .
Parts of the film were shot in the Historic Center of Mexico City between August 19–22 , 2017 .
Dougherty announced the film had wrapped production on September 27 , 2017 .
POST - PRODUCTION Section::::Post - production .
Visual effects for the film will be provided by Moving Picture Company , DNEG , Method Studios , Raynault VFX and Ollin VFX .
Guillaume Rocheron will be the main visual effects supervisor .
In November 2018 , Dougherty announced that post - production on the film had officially ended .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
On July 21 , 2018 , Dougherty revealed that Bear McCreary will compose the film 's score , incorporating themes from Akira Ifukube 's previous Godzilla scores .
Regarding his involvement , McCreary stated , " I am thrilled to be the composer for Godzilla : King of the Monsters , and honored beyond words to have the opportunity to contribute to one of cinema 's longest - running musical legacies .
" The first trailer featured a rearrangement of Claude Debussy 's Clair de Lune by Michael Afanasyev for Imagine Music .
McCreary further expanded on his plans and involvement , stating ,
In November 2018 , a sample of McCreary 's Godzilla theme was leaked online after it was used during a panel at Tokyo Comic Con .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
In June 2017 , Legendary 's official Twitter account for Kong : Skull Island began posting videos revealing a timeline and background information of Monarch 's discoveries , which teased elements for Godzilla : King of the Monsters and Godzilla vs. Kong .
During the 2017 San Diego Comic - Con , Legendary revealed an image of a stone sculpture featuring Mothra , two larvae , and an egg .
On July 12 , 2018 , two first - look images featuring Godzilla unleashing his atomic breath skyward , and Millie Bobby Brown and Vera Farmiga were released , along with a few plot details .
On July 18 , 2018 , a teaser clip was released featuring Millie Bobby Brown and the viral Monarch website went live with documents providing information on the monsters .
On July 21 , 2018 , the first trailer was revealed at San Diego Comic - Con and later released online that same day .
In October 2018 , Legendary announced plans for a prequel graphic novel titled Godzilla : Aftershock .
It will be written by Arvid Nelson , illustrated by Drew Edward Johnson and scheduled to be released in spring 2019 .
That same month , Legendary Comics held a panel titled Godzilla : Secrets of the MonsterVerse at the L.A. Comic Con , which presented a sneak peek at Godzilla : Aftershock .
In November 2018 , a panel for the film was held at the Tokyo Comic - Con where Dougherty revealed concept art , a teaser for an upcoming trailer , and SH MonsterArts figures revealing the designs of the Titans .
That same month , Dougherty revealed a new image of Godzilla from the film with a caption from Verses 33 and 34 in Job Chapter 41 from the New International Bible .
In early December 2018 , teaser clips of Rodan , Mothra , and King Ghidorah from a then - upcoming trailer were released online .
On December 9 , 2018 , a new trailer premiered at Comic Con Experience .
On December 10 , 2018 , the film 's first teaser poster and CCXP trailer were released .
On December 13 , 2018 , character posters for Rodan , Mothra , and Ghidorah were released .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Godzilla : King of the Monsters is scheduled to be released on May 31 , 2019 , in 2D , 3D , Dolby Cinema and IMAX by Warner Bros. Pictures , except in Japan where it will be distributed by Toho .
The film was originally scheduled to be released on June 8 , 2018 .
However , in May 2016 , it was pushed back to March 22 , 2019 and then again to its current release date .
The film will be released as Godzilla II :
King of the Monsters in some markets . SEQUELS Section::::Sequels .
In September 2015 , Legendary moved Kong : Skull Island from Universal to Warner Bros. , which sparked media speculation that Godzilla and King Kong will appear in a film together .
In October 2015 , Legendary confirmed that they would unite Godzilla and King Kong in Godzilla vs. Kong , set for a May 29 , 2020 release date .
Legendary plans to create a shared cinematic franchise " centered around Monarch " that " brings together Godzilla and Legendary 's King Kong in an ecosystem of other giant super - species , both classic and new . "
Godzilla vs. Kong is scheduled to follow up on May 22 , 2020 , with Adam Wingard directing the film .
REFERENCES
NOTES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Monarch Sciences website