1 - 2-SWITCH 1 - 2-Switch is a party game developed and published by Nintendo for the Nintendo Switch , which was released worldwide on March 3 , 2017 .
The game extensively uses the system 's Joy - Con controllers , with players facing each other performing various minigames .
By 2018 , it sold over two million copies worldwide , making it one of the best - selling games on the platform , despite the mixed reception .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
1 - 2-Switch is a party game in which players do not usually rely on what is happening on a screen , but rather make use of audio cues and the functionality of the Switch 's Joy - Con controllers to play in several different games .
It features 28 different minigames , most of which involve two players , who each use one of the Joy - Con controllers and are often encouraged to look at each other during gameplay .
Aside from tutorial videos for each game , players mostly rely solely on audio cues and feedback from the Joy - Con 's rumble feature to indicate how well they are playing each game .
MINIGAMES
* Air Guitar : Players must use their Joy - Con controller as if to strum an air guitar to the beat of rock music .
* Baby : A single - player game where players must rock a crying infant to sleep and put it down gently without awaking it .
* Ball Count : Using the Joy - Con 's HD Rumble feature , players must guess how many balls are rolling around inside a box .
They tilt the controller while it is in the palm of their hand .
They can hide their guess , preventing their opponent from choosing the same number to automatically end the game in a tie .
* Baseball : One player chooses between two pitching choices , and the other attempts to get players to home base .
* Beach Flag :
Players jog on the spot in order to be the first to reach a flag .
The controller vibrates when they are at the flag 's location , and they raise the controller to lift it up .
*
Boxing Gym : Players follow instructions on how to throw a punch , with the quickest player to perform the most accurate punch receiving a point .
* Copy Dance : Each player takes turns making three dance poses , which the other player must copy in time to the music .
Players are scored based on accuracy , energy , timing and poses .
*
Dance Off : Both players must freestyle dance to the same beat , judged on rhythm and performance .
The music has brief periods of stopping , as the dancers must hold their position .
* Eating Contest : A single - player game which makes use of the right Joy - Con controller 's IR motion camera .
Players hold the controller a short distance from their mouth and make biting motions to try and eat as many virtual sandwiches as they can within the time limit .
* Fake Draw : An alternate version of Quick Draw featuring alternate music , a night theme , and words such as " fly " and " file " said before " fire " , to trick the players into firing early and being disqualified .
There is a small chance that " fire " will be said right away , eliminating the purpose of fake outs .
* Gorilla : Players pound their chest in a given rhythm , then pound their chest as fast as they can .
* Joy - Con Rotation : Players place the Joy - Con controllers on a surface and take it in turns to carefully lift and rotate the controller without shaking too much .
The HD rumble and audio alert the player if they are about to fail a turn , with the player given 5 cues before they fail .
The winner is whoever rotates their controller the most over three turns .
* Milk : Players must use gestures and specific button presses in order to milk a virtual cow , with the aim to milk more jugs than their opponent .
* Plate Spin : Players must use their Joy - Con controllers to keep an imaginary plate stable , having to spin them if balance is lost .
* Quick Draw : Resembling a Western fast draw , both players must point their controllers downwards and , upon receiving the order to fire , must aim their controller and fire before their opponent .
* Runway : Players listen to musical cues to strut down a runway and make dynamic poses .
* Safe Crack : Players must race to open up a safe by twisting the Joy - Con controllers to turn a dial , paying attention to bumps from the controller .
* Samurai Training : One player makes an overhead sword swinging motion while the other player must clap their controller , as if they were catching a sword with their bare hands .
Players take it in turns until one player fails to catch their opponent 's sword .
* Shave : Players use the Joy - Con controllers as electric razors , racing to be the first to completely shave their virtual beards .
* Signal Flags : Players listen to cues from a female and male announcer .
The players must follow the instructions from the female voice while doing the opposite of the male 's voice .
* Sneaky Dice :
Based on Liar 's dice , players use their Joy - Con controllers as a cup and dice .
Players can shake the controllers around to shuffle the dice , and they can re - roll up to 3 times .
When the cups are lifted , the player with the highest number on their dice wins .
However , as the number on a player 's dice can only be detected by the opposing player through vibration , players may attempt to bluff their opponent , tricking them into shaking their cup and ending up with a lower number .
* Soda Shake : Players shake up a single Joy - Con controller representing a bottle of soda and pass it around , aiming to not be the one holding it when the cork inevitably pops .
* Sword Fight : Players use the Joy - Con controllers as swords , holding down the trigger buttons to guard and releasing it and swinging the controller to attack .
Players can guard against a vertical strike by swinging horizontally , and vice versa .
* Table Tennis : A table tennis game in which players must listen to rhythmic audio cues to hit back a ping pong ball .
Players can perform lobs and smashes to alter the flow and try to throw off their opponent .
*
Telephone
: Players place their Joy - Con controllers on a surface and must be the first to pick theirs up when the phone rings .
Sometimes , they are given a specific ring to listen for .
* Treasure Chest :
Players rotate the Joy - Con to unravel chains surrounding a treasure chest .
*
Wizard :
Players use the Joy - Con controllers as makeshift wands , using gestures and counters to push back a clashing beam of magic .
The game is started by waving the Joy - Con in circular motions above the player 's head , and then thrusting to move the energy closer to their opponent .
Thrusting immediately after the opponent results in a counter , which moves the energy further than a normal thrust .
* Zen : Players hold a given pose with the Joy - Con sitting in their hands , attempting to stay as still as possible .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
After Nintendo announced the game at the Nintendo Switch event in January 2017 , Nintendo showed off six of the minigames to the public .
The game was also unveiled to show off Nintendo 's Joy - Con capabilities , through the HD Rumble and IR Motion Camera features .
As a way to promote the milking minigame and the Nintendo Switch , several representatives of Nintendo of America took part in a cow milking competition at a dairy farm in Woodstock , Vermont .
RECEPTION PRE - RELEASE Section::::Reception . Section::::Pre - release .
Upon the release of its initial trailer , several commentators compared the game to the WarioWare series .
Ben Skipper of the International Business Times made note of the game 's sexual innuendos .
Nintendo 's decision to release the game separately from the system was criticized by several commentators , arguing that the game would be better off as a pack - in game , similarly to Wii Sports , although Nintendo stated that they opted to allow consumers to select a game to purchase rather than bundling one and increase the Switch 's price so as to not disinterest consumers and compromise the console 's sales .
Cory Arnold of Destructoid criticized the lack of a true single - player mode , and went as far as to say that the minigames were worse than what was included in Wii Sports , arguing that they lacked any sort of progression .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
1 - 2-Switch received " mixed " reviews , according to review aggregator Metacritic .
American animal rights organization PETA was critical of the milking minigame , accusing Nintendo of " sugarcoating " the act .
By April 2017 , Nintendo reported that 1 - 2-Switch had shipped nearly a million copies worldwide .
By March 2018 , that number had risen to over two million .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Year ! !
Award ! !
Category ! !
Result ! !
Ref REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS