THE SINNER ( TV SERIES )
The Sinner is an American anthology crime drama mystery television series , based on the novel of the same name by German crime writer Petra Hammesfahr .
Eight episodes of the program , originally conceived of as a " close - ended series " , were ordered in January 2017 and premiered on USA Network on August 2 , 2017 .
In March 2018 , the series was renewed for a second season , also of eight episodes , which premiered on August 1 , 2018 , and concluded on September 19 , 2018 .
The first season of The Sinner received two nominations at the 75th Golden Globe Awards : Best Miniseries or Television Film and Best Actress – Miniseries or Television Film for Jessica Biel .
Biel was also nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Limited Series or Movie .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
In the first season , Detective Harry Ambrose ( Bill Pullman ) delves into the past of a troubled young mother ( Jessica Biel ) , in order to determine why she fatally stabbed a man during a beach outing but has no memory of why she committed the crime .
In the second season , Ambrose returns to his hometown , after a 13-year - old boy confesses to poisoning a couple , and learns secrets that the town 's inhabitants are determined to keep buried .
CAST MAIN * Jessica Biel as Cora Tannetti ( season 1 )
* Christopher Abbott as Mason Tannetti ( season 1 )
* Dohn Norwood as Detective Dan Leroy ( season 1 ; guest season 2 )
* Abby Miller as Sergeant Caitlin Sullivan ( season 1 )
* Joanna Adler as Captain Anne Farmer ( season 1 ) * Bill Pullman as Detective Harry Ambrose * Carrie Coon as Vera Walker ( season 2 )
* Natalie Paul as Detective Heather Novack ( season 2 ) * Hannah Gross as Marin Calhoun ( season 2 )
* Elisha Henig as Julian Walker ( season 2 )
* Tracy Letts as Jack Novack ( season 2 )
RECURRING SEASON 1 * Danielle Burgess as Maddie * Patti D'Arbanville as Lorna Tannetti , Mason 's mother * Kathryn Erbe as Fay Ambrose , Harry 's wife * Enid Graham as Elizabeth Lacey , Cora 's mother * Jacob Pitts as J.D. * Nadia Alexander as Phoebe Lacey , Cora 's sister * Rebecca Wisocky as Margaret Lacey , Cora 's aunt
*
Eric Todd as Frankie Belmont * Robert Funaro as Ron Tannetti , Mason 's father SEASON 2 * Ellen Adair as Bess McTeer , one of Julian 's victims , who died by poisoning * Adam David Thompson as Adam Lowry , one of Julian 's victims , who died by poisoning * David Call as Andy " Brick " Brickowski , an officer working with Heather
* Jay O. Sanders as Chief Tom Lidell , the police department 's chief * Brady Jenness as young Harry Ambrose * Allison Case as Rosemary Ambrose , Harry 's mother in flashbacks
* Brennan Brown as Lionel Jeffries ( " the Beacon " )
EPISODES
SEASON 1 ( 2017 )
SEASON 2 ( 2018 )
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
The series , described as a " close - ended series " by the network , was adapted from the novel of the same name by Petra Hammesfahr ; however , the book 's darker outlook was toned down and the location shifted from Germany to Upstate New York in the United States .
It is the first time that Biel has served as an executive producer on a series , a role she said was " gold " .
Biel stated that she moved into production so that she could develop projects with challenging and interesting roles rather than wait for them to happen .
The series was ordered on January 17 , 2017 , and the eight episodes were broadcast on USA Network between August 2 and September 20 , 2017 .
Originally , the series was created as a miniseries ; however , in March 2018 , it was announced that The Sinner would return for a second season .
The second season premiered on August 1 , 2018 , comprised eight episodes and concluded on September 19 , 2018 .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The main song featured in the first - season storyline is " Huggin and Kissin " by Big Black Delta .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
In May 2018 , Carrie Coon , Natalie Paul and Hannah Gross were cast for the second season as Vera , Heather and Marin respectively .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE SEASON 1
Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
Section::::Season 1 .
The series received critical acclaim , with Biel 's performance being praised .
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the series has an approval rating of 94 % based on 35 reviews , with an average rating of 6.9/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Smartly unpredictable and led by powerful performances from a talented cast , the darkly compelling The Sinner sinks its hooks in fast and does n't let go .
"
Metacritic , which assigns a rating to reviews , gave the series an average weighted score of 71 out of 100 , based on 23 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
In August 2017 , it was announced as the No . 1 new cable series of 2017 , according to Nielsen delayed viewing data .
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
A 100 % approval rating for the second season was reported by Rotten Tomatoes , with an average rating of 7.54/10 based on 26 reviews , and a critical consensus reading , " In its second season , The Sinner establishes itself as an engrossing why - dunnit thriller series with staying power .
"
Metacritic assigned a score of 75 out of 100 based on 16 critics for the second season , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Once again praising the writing and performances , several critics noting that the follow - up series surpassed expectations for season two , as star Jessica Biel 's character is not returning from the first season , which also used up the source material from the original book .
Alex McLevy of The A.V. Club wrote a rave review of the first few episodes , in particular the performance of Carrie Coon as the mysterious Vera Walker .
McLevy wrote that the second season could be even better than the first , noting , " Two things keep it from feeling like a rehash of season one : the excellent choices in new narrative twists made by writer - creator Derek Simonds , and the caliber of talent involved in bringing it to life .
Chief among the latter group is Carrie Coon , who ... brings a wonderful fusion of frazzled humanism and sinister duplicity to the part , another magnetic performance by the actor that elevates the material and lends gravitas to some of the more daffily implausible turns . "
Ben Travers of indieWire wrote , " Derek Simonds assembled a helluva team for an intriguing follow - up season .
The first three episodes of Season 2 match the tone and intensity of the writer 's gripping debut , while new cast members Tracy Letts , Natalie Paul , and Carrie Coon more than make up for any holes left by the original cast . ...
Season 2 has enough going on it could spin off the rails , but the mere fact it has so much working for it thus far is a big win for everyone involved .
The Sinner is no one - hit wonder . "
RATINGS SEASON 1 SEASON 2 AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . ! scope="col "
Year !
scope="col " Ceremony ! scope="col " Category ! scope="col " Nominee(s ) ! scope="col " Result ! scope="col " class="unsortable " People 's Choice AwardsPrimetime Emmy Award Outstanding Lead Actress in a Limited Series or Movie REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS