ORPHAN X Orphan X is a 2016 thriller novel written by Gregg Hurwitz .
It is the first in a five - book series of the same name from publisher Minotaur Books with the film rights belonging to Warner Bros. Bradley Cooper is likely to produce and possibly star the movie .
The follow - up books in the series are " Buy a Bullet " (
A short story released as an e - book in 2016 ) , " The Nowhere Man " ( Released in January 2017 ) and " Hellbent " ( released in 2018 ) .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The book centers around the character Evan Smoak .
At the age of 12 , he was enrolled in a top - secret operation known as the " Orphan Program .
" He is the 24th recruit in the program and is known only as Orphan X.
The goal of the program is to train orphans so they can be assassins for government agencies .
The program is shut down but Orphan X maintains access to the program 's funding and weapons .
In his 30s , Smoak begins freelancing as an assassin , using his skills to fight corruption in the form of vigilante justice .
For each person he helps , he tells them to pay it forward by giving someone in need of help his phone number .
During his adventures , he discovers that former Orphan agents have also begun freelancing and are trying to assassinate him .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The Washington Post compared Orphan X to the beginning of a Bourne like book series , referring to it as a " smart , stylish , state - of - the - art thriller .
"
Author Robert Crais stated that " a new thriller superstar is born " and novelist David Baldacci was quoted as saying " read this book ...
you will thank me . "
The Associated Press stated that Hurwitz " delivers a masterpiece of suspense and thrills ... that invokes the best of " Batman , " " The Bourne Identity " and " The Equalizer " films . "
Orphan X became an international bestseller , making lists such as the USA Today , The Boston Globe , New Zealand , and Australia . FILM ADAPTATION Section::::Film adaptation .
Prior to the release of Orphan X , Warner Bros. purchased the film rights .
The film adaptation will be produced by 22nd & Green , the production company owned by Bradley Cooper and Todd Phillips .
Hurwitz is also said to be the writer for the movie adaptation .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS