BELIEVER ( IMAGINE DRAGONS SONG )
" Believer " is a song by American rock band Imagine Dragons .
The song was released on February 1 , 2017 through Interscope Records and Kidinakorner as the lead single from the band 's third studio album , Evolve ( 2017 ) .
It was written by Dan Reynolds , Wayne Sermon , Ben McKee , Daniel Platzman , Justin Tranter and its producers Mattman & Robin .
" Believer " peaked at number four on the US Billboard Hot 100 , becoming the band 's third top ten single after " Radioactive " and " Demons " in that country .
It also reached the top ten in Austria , Canada , Czech Republic , France , Italy , Poland , Portugal , and Switzerland .
The song played heavily on advertisements such as for Nintendo 's Nintendo Switch and various movie trailers and television shows .
It became the fifth best - selling song of 2017 in the United States .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
In November 2016 , Dan Reynolds told People that the song was inspired by his experiences with ankylosing spondylitis in 2015 .
He said that , " The meaning of the song is really reflecting on specific things in my life that were painful , whether it was anxiety and dealing with crowds , feeling overwhelmed by that or the success of the band , disease , going through depression — anything that was a source of pain in my life .
And just rising above that , finding a place of perspective where I could be appreciative of the pain in my life and make it my greatest strength . "
COMPOSITION Section::::Composition .
According to sheet music published at Sheetmusicdirect.com , " Believer " is a moderato tempo of 120 beats per minute .
Written in cut time , the song is in the key of B minor .
Dan Reynolds ' vocal range spans from A to D during the song .
MUSIC VIDEO Section::::Music video .
The official music video for the song was released on March 7 , 2017 , on the Imagine Dragons YouTube account and features a boxing match between Dan Reynolds and Dolph Lundgren .
It was directed by Matt Eastin and it features what seems to be a young Dan drawing on his notepad in scenes .
Dan is losing , and he says that he wants to stop , with Dolph replying , " We ca n't , " making it sound like they are forced to fight by a higher authority .
It ends with Reynolds barely conscious , and we get to see what young Dan sketched : a symbol identical to the one on Reynolds ' chest , the " Evolve " symbol .
As of December 2018 , the video has over 760 million views .
COMMERCIAL PERFORMANCE Section::::Commercial performance .
" Believer " reached number four on the Billboard Hot 100 , and topped the Billboard Hot Rock Songs ( 29 weeks so far ) , Alternative Songs ( 13 weeks so far ) , and Adult Pop Songs ( 6 weeks ) .
Among component charts , it also topped Rock Airplay , Rock Streaming Songs , Rock Digital Sale Songs , and Top TV Commercials Charts .
It also topped the Canada Alternative Rock Chart .
" Believer " broke the 14-year - old record for the most spins on the Mediabase Alternative chart .
" Believer " has reached the top ten in Austria , Canada , Czech Republic , France , Hungary , Italy , Poland , Portugal , Slovakia , Switzerland , and the United States .
" Believer " was the number one song on several Billboard year - end charts , including the Hot Rock Songs chart , the Rock Airplay chart , and the Alternative Songs chart .
The song was the fifth best - selling song of 2017 in the United States , selling 1,598,000 copies in the year .
REMIXES Section::::Remixes .
Kaskade remixed " Believer " in June 2017 .
LIVE PERFORMANCES Section::::Live performances .
The first televised performance of " Believer " was during the March 22 , 2017 episode of ABC late - night talk show Jimmy Kimmel Live ! .
They then performed the song at BBC Radio 1 's Big Weekend .
TRACK LISTING
CHARTS
WEEKLY CHARTS
Section::::Charts .
Section::::Weekly charts . ! scope="col " Chart ( 2017 ) ! scope="col " Peakposition !
scope="row
" France ( SNEP ) ! scope="row " Mexico Airplay ( Billboard ) ! scope="row " Philippines ( Philippine Hot 100 ) ! scope="row " Romania ( Airplay 100 ) YEAR - END CHARTS Section::::Year - end charts . ! scope="col " Chart ( 2017 ) ! scope="col " Position ! scope="row
" Australia ( ARIA ) ! scope="row " Austria ( Ö3 Austria Top 40 ) ! scope="row " Belgium ( Ultratop Flanders ) ! scope="row " Belgium ( Ultratop Wallonia ) ! scope="row " Canada ( Canadian Hot 100 ) ! scope="row " Denmark ( Tracklisten ) ! scope="row
" Germany ( Official German Charts ) !
scope="row " Hungary ( Single Top 40 ) ! scope="row " Hungary ( Stream Top 40 ) ! scope="row " Italy ( FIMI ) ! scope="row " Netherlands ( Single Top 100 ) ! scope="row " New Zealand ( Recorded Music NZ ) ! scope="row " Poland ( ZPAV ) !
scope="row"Romania
( Airplay 100 ) !
scope="row " Russia ( Tophit ) ! scope="row " Sweden ( Sverigetopplistan ) ! scope="row " Switzerland ( Schweizer Hitparade ) ! scope="row
" UK Singles ( Official Charts Company ) ! scope="row " US Billboard Hot 100 ! scope="col " Chart ( 2018 ) ! scope="col " Position !
scope="row
" US Billboard Hot 100 CERTIFICATIONS Section::::Certifications . !
scope="row
" Portugal ( AFP )
Platinum 10,000 USAGE IN MEDIA Section::::Usage in media .
The song was used in a Nintendo Switch commercial shown during Super Bowl LI .
The song was also used in a Bleacher Report video tribute to the NBA Slam Dunk Contest .
Dancing with the Stars contestant Bonner Bolton and his partner Sharna Burgess performed an Argentine tango to the song during the May 8 , 2017 airing .
"
Believer " also played during the season one finale of Riverdale and on the WWE 24 :
Finn Bálor documentary .
The song appeared in the trailer for Murder on the Orient Express where its usage was met with mixed response .
It is also used in the 2018 Jeep Wrangler launch at the 2017 Los Angeles Auto Show .
The song was used during a training montage in The 15:17 to Paris .
The song was used as the theme song for the 2018 NRL Finals Series .
SEE ALSO
*
Believer ( 2018 American film ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS