LEGAL RECOGNITION OF NON - BINARY GENDER Multiple countries legally recognize non - binary or third gender classifications .
In some countries , such classifications may only be available to intersex people , born with sex characteristics that " do not fit the typical definitions for male or female bodies " .
In other countries , they may only ( or also ) be available to people with gender identities that differ from their sex assigned at birth .
Some non - western societies have long recognized transgender and/or non - binary people as a third gender , though this may not ( or may only recently ) include formal legal recognition .
Among western nations , Australia may have been the first to recognize a third classification , following recognition of Alex MacFarlane as having indeterminate sex , reported in 2003 .
Transgender advocate Norrie May - Welby was recognized as having unspecified status in 2014 .
In the United States , an Oregon circuit court ruled in 2016 that Jamie Shupe could legally change gender to non - binary .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In recent years , some societies have begun to legally recognize genderqueer , non - binary or third gender identities .
Some non - western societies have long recognized transgender people as a third gender , though this may not ( or may only recently ) include formal legal recognition .
Among western nations , Australia may have been the first to recognize a third classification , following recognition of Alex MacFarlane as having indeterminate sex , reported in 2003 .
Transgender advocate Norrie May - Welby was recognized as having unspecified status in 2014 .
In 2016 , an Oregon circuit court ruled that Jamie Shupe , could legally change gender to non - binary .
TRANSGENDER PEOPLE Section::::Transgender people .
The Open Society Foundations published a report , License to Be Yourself , in May 2014 , documenting " some of the world 's most progressive and rights - based laws and policies that enable trans people to change their gender identity on official documents " .
The report comments on the recognition of third classifications , stating :
The document also quotes Mauro Cabral of Global Action for Trans Equality :
The report concludes that two or three options are insufficient : " A more inclusive approach would be to increase options for people to self - define their sex and gender identity . "
INTERSEX PEOPLE Section::::Intersex people .
Like all individuals , some intersex individuals may be raised as a particular sex ( male or female ) but then identify with another later in life , while most do not .
A 2012 clinical review suggests that between 8.5 - 20 % of persons with intersex conditions may experience gender dysphoria , distress or discomfort as a result of the sex and gender they were assigned at birth .
Australian sociological research published in 2016 shows that 19 % of 272 people born with atypical sex characteristics participating in the study selected an " X " or " other " option , while 52 % are women , 23 % men and 6 % unsure .
According to the Asia Pacific Forum of National Human Rights Institutions , few countries have provided for the legal recognition of intersex people .
The Asia Pacific Forum states that the legal recognition of intersex people is firstly about access to the same rights as other men and women , when assigned male or female ; secondly it is about access to administrative corrections to legal documents when an original sex assignment is not appropriate ; and thirdly , while opt in schemes may help some individuals , legal recognition is not about the creation of a third sex or gender classification for intersex people as a population .
In March 2017 , an Australian and Aotearoa / New Zealand community statement called for an end to legal classification of sex , stating that legal third classifications , like binary classifications , were based on structural violence and failed to respect diversity and a " right to self - determination " .
It also called for the criminalization of deferrable intersex medical interventions .
JURISDICTIONS Section::::Jurisdictions .
Many countries have adopted laws to accommodate non - binary gender identities .
AUSTRIA Section::::Austria .
After the decision of the German Federal Constitutional Court ( Bundesverfassungsgericht ) of 9 November 2017 , Austrian media report that a similar case is also pending at the Constitutional Court ( Verfassungsgerichtshof ) in Austria .
Two lower judicial instances already decided against the possibility of a " third gender " .
Each year at least 35 children in Austria are reported to be born with ambiguous sex characteristics .
Surgical interventions on intersex children , to make them fit one of the binary sex characteristics , are criticized by Verein Intergeschlechtliche Menschen Österreich ( VIMÖ ) , an Austrian association fighting for the rights of intersex people .
They demand that children should be free to decide on these matters when they are grown up .
Johannes Wahala , president of the Austrian Society For Sexologies and head of Beratungsstelle Courage advice center in Graz condemns these operations and wishes for the introduction of a third gender .
On 15 June 2018 , the Austrian Constitutional Court reached a decision , published in a news release on 29 June , that Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights guarantees recognition of gender identity beyond the binary male or female , and that people with a variation in gender development other than male or female must be allowed to leave a gender entry empty and must be allowed to have a positive other entry implemented .
They also found that current law is not in contradiction to these requirements , and can be interpreted in a way that is conformant to the constitutional right of recognition of gender identity via Article 8 of the ECHR .
The Court ruled that the national interests listed in Article 8.1 ECHR do not outweigh the very sensible interest of an individual to recognition of their personal life , including gender identity , and that other laws can be adapted if needed .
The Court indicate that administrative bodies may require proof of the adequacy of a change to an entry and the relation to a persons actual social life , and that Article 8.1 ECHR does not establish a right to arbitrarily named entries .
They have not decided on a specific name a third gender option should have , but cite recommendations as " divers " , " inter " , " offen " .
AUSTRALIA Section::::Australia .
First reported in January 2003 , Australians can choose " X " as their gender or sex .
Alex MacFarlane is believed to be the first person in Australia to obtain a birth certificate recording sex as indeterminate , and the first Australian passport with an ' X ' sex marker in 2003 .
This was stated by the West Australian newspaper to be on the basis of a challenge by MacFarlane , using an indeterminate birth certificate issued by the State of Victoria .
Other individuals known to have similar early options include Tony Briffa of Organisation Intersex International Australia and former mayor of City of Hobsons Bay , Victoria , previously acknowledged as the world 's first openly intersex public official and mayor .
Government policy between 2003 and 2011 was to issue passports with an ' X ' marker to persons who could " present a birth certificate that notes their sex as indeterminate " .
In 2011 , the Australian Passport Office introduced new guidelines for issuing of passports with a new gender , and broadened availability of an X descriptor to all individuals with documented " indeterminate " sex .
The revised policy stated that " sex reassignment surgery is not a prerequisite to issue a passport in a new gender .
Birth or citizenship certificates do not need to be amended . "
Australian Commonwealth guidelines on the recognition of sex and gender , published in June 2013 , extended the use of an ' X ' gender marker to any adult who chooses that option , in all dealings with the Commonwealth government and its agencies .
The option is being introduced over a three - year period .
The guidelines also clarify that the federal government collects data on gender , rather than sex .
In March 2014 , the Australian Capital Territory introduced an ' X ' classification for birth certificates .
Norrie May - Welby is popularly - but erroneously - often regarded as the first person in the world to obtain officially indeterminate , unspecified or " genderless " status .
May - Welby became the first transsexual person in Australia to pursue a legal status of neither a man nor a woman , in 2010 .
In April 2014 , the High Court of Australia ruled that NSW Registry of Births , Deaths and Marriages must record in the register that the sex of May - Welby is " non - specific " .
The Court found that sex affirmation " surgery did not resolve her sexual ambiguity " .
An alliance of organizations including the National LGBTI Health Alliance , Organisation Intersex International Australia and Transgender Victoria has called for X to be redefined as non - binary .
In March 2017 , an Australian and Aotearoa / New Zealand community statement called for an end to legal classification of sex , stating that legal third classifications , like binary classifications , were based on structural violence and failed to respect diversity and a " right to self - determination " .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
In June 2016 , the government of the province of Ontario announced changes to the way gender will be displayed on health cards and driver 's licenses .
Starting June 13 , the Ontario health card no longer displays a sex designation .
In early 2017 , Ontario drivers will have the option to display " X " as a gender identifier on their driver 's licenses .
In April 2017 , a baby born in British Columbia , Searyl Atli Doty , became the first in the world known to be issued a health card with a gender - neutral " U " sex marker .
The parent , Kori Doty , who is non - binary transgender , wanted to give the child the opportunity to discover their own gender identity .
The province has refused to issue a birth certificate to the child without specifying a gender ; Doty has filed a legal challenge .
Doty and seven other transgender and intersex people have filed a human rights complaint against the province , alleging that publishing gender markers on birth certificates is discriminatory .
In July 2017 , the Northwest Territories began allowing " X " as a non - binary option on birth certificates .
On August 31 , 2017 , Canada began allowing an observation to be added to passports requesting that the holder 's gender should be read as " X " , indicating that it is unspecified , though a gender of " M " or " F " had to be added as a gender for an undefined period to comply with legal requirements of other countries .
DENMARK Section::::Denmark .
According to comment by Transgender Europe , Danish citizens have been issued passport with option ' X ' upon application , without medical requirements .
GERMANY
Section::::Germany .
Germany is thought to be the first European country that recognizes " indeterminate " sex on birth certificates , which is materialized by the absence of any gender marker , from November 2013 .
A report by the German Ethics Council stated that the law was passed because " Many people who were subjected to a ' normalizing ' operation in their childhood have later felt it to have been a mutilation and would never have agreed to it as adults .
"
Deutsche Welle reported that an " indeterminate " ' option ' was made available for the birth certificates of intersex infants with ambiguous genitalia on 1 November 2013 .
The move is controversial with many intersex advocates in Germany and elsewhere suggesting that it might encourage surgical interventions , or simply fails to address the key health concerns of intersex people .
On 21 January 2015 , the Celle Court of Appeals confirmed in a judgment that intersex people can not obtain a gender marker other than " female " or " male " in their birth certificate , but only the absence of any such marker .
The court held at the same time that even an adult intersex person who was registered with a gender marker at birth can obtain the deletion of that gender marker .
This judgment was sent for review by the Federal Court of Justice .
On 8 November 2017 , the Federal Constitutional Court released a press statement about its ruling from 10 October 2017 , which is in favour of a positive third gender option instead of no entry .
On 15 August 2018 , the German government approved a draft law allowing a third gender option on birth certificates for babies who are not distinctly male or female .
INDIA Section::::India .
The Hijra of India are probably the most well known and populous third sex type in the modern world –
Mumbai - based community health organization
The Humsafar Trust estimates there are between 5 and 6 million hijras in India .
In different areas they are known as Aravani / Aruvani or Jogappa .
Often ( somewhat misleadingly ) called eunuchs in English , they may be born intersex or apparently male , dress in feminine clothes and generally see themselves as neither men nor women .
Only eight percent of hijras visiting Humsafar clinics are nirwaan ( castrated ) .
Indian photographer Dayanita Singh writes about her friendship with a Hijra , Mona Ahmed , and their two different societies ' beliefs about gender : " When I once asked her if she would like to go to Singapore for a sex change operation , she told me , ' You really do not understand .
I am the third sex , not a man trying to be a woman .
It is your society 's problem that you only recognize two sexes . '
"
Hijra social movements have campaigned for recognition as a third sex , and in 2005 , Indian passport application forms were updated with three gender options : M , F , and E ( for male , female , and eunuch , respectively ) .
Some Indian languages such as Sanskrit have three gender options .
In November 2009 , India agreed to list eunuchs and transgender people as " others " , distinct from males and females , in voting rolls and voter identity cards .
On April 15 , 2014 , the Supreme Court of India recognized a third gender that is neither male nor female , and as a class entitled to reservation in education and jobs , stating " Recognition of transgenders as a third gender is not a social or medical issue but a human rights issue .
"
This verdict made India one of the few countries to give this landmark judgment .
In addition to the feminine role of hijras , which is widespread across the subcontinent , a few occurrences of institutionalized " female masculinity " have been noted in modern India .
Among the Gaddhi in the foothills of the Himalayas , some girls adopt a role as a sadhin , renouncing marriage , and dressing and working as men , but retaining female names and pronouns .
A late - nineteenth century anthropologist noted the existence of a similar role in Madras , that of the basivi .
However , historian Walter Penrose concludes that in both cases " their status is perhaps more ' transgendered ' than ' third - gendered . ' "
In April 2014 , Justice KS Radhakrishnan , of Supreme Court of India declared transgender to be the third gender in Indian law , in a case brought by the National Legal Services Authority ( Nalsa ) against Union of India and others .
The ruling said : Seldom , our society realizes or cares to realize the trauma , agony and pain which the members of Transgender community undergo , nor appreciates the innate feelings of the members of the Transgender community , especially of those whose mind and body disown their biological sex .
Our society often ridicules and abuses the Transgender community and in public places like railway stations , bus stands , schools , workplaces , malls , theatres , hospitals , they are sidelined and treated as untouchables , forgetting the fact that the moral failure lies in the society 's unwillingness to contain or embrace different gender identities and expressions , a mindset which we have to change .
Justice Radhakrishnan said that transgender people should be treated consistently with other minorities under the law , enabling them to access jobs , healthcare and education .
He framed the issue as one of human rights , saying that , " These TGs , even though insignificant in numbers , are still human beings and therefore they have every right to enjoy their human rights " , concluding by declaring that : * Hijras , Eunuchs , apart from binary gender , be treated as " third gender " for the purpose of safeguarding their rights under Part III of our Constitution and the laws made by the Parliament and the State Legislature .
* * Transgender persons ' right to decide their self - identified gender is also upheld and the Centre and State Governments are directed to grant legal recognition of their gender identity such as male , female or as third gender .
* THE NETHERLANDS Section::::The Netherlands .
In May 2018 , Leonne Zeegers was the first Dutch citizen to receive the " X " marked gender on the passport instead of " male " or " female " .
Leonne , then 57 , was born male , before having gender reassignment surgery and become female , but identifies as an intersex person .
Leonne won a court case which meant that preventing someone from registering officially as gender neutral is a " violation of private life , self - determination and personal autonomy " .
It will , however , still be the decision of the court on whether the " X " will be issued on anyones passport in the future .
The ruling opened doors for Dutch LGBT groups to ask the government for anyone to be able to identify as gender neutral in the future .
NEPAL Section::::Nepal .
On December 27 , 2007 , the Supreme Court of Nepal issued a decision mandating that the government scrap all laws that discriminated based on sexual orientation and/or gender identity and establish a committee to study same - sex marriage policy .
The court also established a third - gender category .
Nepalese official documents afford citizens three gender options : male , female , and " others " .
This may include people who present or perform as a gender that is different from the one that was assigned to them at birth .
Nepal 's 2011 census was the first national census in the world to allow people to register as a gender other than male or female .
The 2007 supreme court decision ordered the government to issue citizenship ID cards that allowed " third - gender " or " other " to be listed .
The court also ordered that the only requirements to identify as third - gender would be the person 's own self - identification . "
Legal provisions should be made to provide for gender identity to the people of transgender or third gender , under which female third gender , male third gender and intersexual are grouped , as per the concerned person 's self - feeling " More recent material indicates that this third option is not available to intersex persons .
NEW ZEALAND Section::::New Zealand .
Birth certificates are available at birth showing " indeterminate " sex if it is not possible to assign a sex .
The New Zealand Department of Internal Affairs states , " A person 's sex can be recorded as indeterminate at the time of birth if it can not be ascertained that the person is either male or female , and there are a number of people so recorded . "
Passports are available from December 2012 with an ' X ' sex descriptor , where " X " means " indeterminate / unspecified " .
These were originally introduced for people transitioning gender .
On 17 July 2015 , Statistics New Zealand introduced a new gender identity classification standard for statistical purposes .
The classification has three categories : male , female , and gender diverse .
Gender diverse can be further divided into four subcategories : gender diverse not further defined , transgender male to female , transgender female to male , and gender diverse not elsewhere classified .
In March 2017 , a Aotearoa / New Zealand and Australian community statement called for an end to legal classification of sex , stating that legal third classifications , like binary classifications , were based on structural violence and failed to respect diversity and a " right to self - determination " .
PAKISTAN Section::::Pakistan .
In Pakistan , the polite term is khwaja sara or " khwaja sira "
( Urdu : خواجه سرا ) , as hijra and khusra are considered derogatory by the khawaja sara community and human rights activists in Pakistan .
As most of Pakistan 's official government and business documents are in English , the term " third gender " has been chosen to represent individuals ( either male or female , neither , and/or both )
that identify themselves as , transsexual , transgender person , cross - dresser ( zenana in Urdu ) , transvestite , and eunuchs ( narnbans in Urdu ) .
In June 2009 , the Supreme Court of Pakistan ordered a census of khawaja sara , who number between 80,000 and 300,000 in Pakistan .
In December 2009 , Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry , the Chief Justice of Pakistan , ordered that the National Database and Registration Authority issue national identity cards to members of the community showing their distinct gender .
" It 's the first time in the 62-year history of Pakistan that such steps are being taken for our welfare " , Almas Bobby , a khawaja sara association 's president , said to Reuters , " It 's a major step towards giving us respect and identity in society .
We are slowly getting respect in society .
Now people recognize that we are also human beings . "
PHILIPPINES Section::::Philippines .
The Philippines is ranked as one of the most gay - friendly nations in the world , and the most LGBT friendly in Asia .
The country ranked as the 10th most gay - friendly in a global survey covering 39 countries , in which only 17 had majorities accepting homosexuality .
A 2013 survey conducted by the Pew Research Center showed that 73 % of adult Filipinos agreed with the statement that " homosexuality should be accepted by society , " up by nine percentage points from 64 percent in 2002 .
The LGBT community remains as one of the country 's minority sectors today .
Lesbian , gay , bisexual , and transgender people often face disadvantages in getting hired for jobs , acquiring rights for civil marriage , and even in starting up personal businesses .
According to an international research , 10 % of the world 's population are theoretically part of the LGBT community , out or not , including 12 million Filipinos that may experience discrimination based on who they are .
This has led to the rise of the cause for LGBT rights , defined as the right to equality and non - discrimination .
As a member of the United Nations , the Philippines is signatory to various international covenants promoting human rights .
THAILAND
Section::::Thailand .
Also commonly referred to as a third sex are the kathoeys ( or " ladyboys " ) of Thailand .
These are people whose assigned sex was male who identify and live as female .
A significant number of Thais perceive kathoeys as belonging to a third gender , including many kathoeys themselves ; others see them as second category women .
Although they are born genetically as male , kathoeys claim to possess a female heart which is the gender they truly are .
Males undergoing sex - change operations are not uncommon occurrences but they are still regarded as men on their identification documents .
Despite this , the Thai society remains one of the world 's most tolerant attitude towards kathoeys or the third gender .
Researcher Sam Winter writes : In 2004 , the Chiang Mai Technology School allocated a separate restroom for kathoeys , with an intertwined male and female symbol on the door .
The 15 kathoey students are required to wear male clothing at school but are allowed to sport feminine hairdos .
The restroom features four stalls , but no urinals .
Although Kathoeys are still not fully respected , they are gradually gaining acceptance and have made themselves a very distinct part of the Thai society .
This is especially true in the entertainment , business , and fashion industries in Thailand , where the Kathoeys play significant roles in leadership and management positions .
In addition , Kathoeys or second - category - women are very sought after when businesses are hiring salespeople .
In many job posts , it is common to see companies state that second - category - women are preferred as their sales force because they are generally seen as more charismatic and expressive individuals .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
The title " Mx . " , is widely accepted in the United Kingdom by government organisations and businesses as an alternative for non - binary people while HESA allows the use of non - binary gender markers for students in higher education .
In 2015 early day motion EDM660 was registered with Parliament .
EDM660 calls for citizens to be permitted access to the X marker on passports .
When the text of EDM660 came to light in 2016 a formal petition was launched through the Parliamentary Petitions Service calling for EDM660 to be passed into law .
In September 2015 the Ministry of Justice responded to a petition calling for self - determination of legal gender , saying that they were not aware of " any specific detriment " experienced by nonbinary people unable to have their genders legally recognised .
In January 2016 the Trans Inquiry Report by the Women and Equalities Committee called for nonbinary people to be protected from discrimination under the Equality Act , for the X gender marker to be added to passports , and for a wholesale review into the needs of nonbinary people by the government within six months .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
On October 26 , 2015 , LGBT civil rights organization Lambda Legal filed a federal discrimination lawsuit against the United States Department of State for denying navy veteran Dana Zzyym , Associate Director of Intersex Campaign for Equality , a passport because they are , and identify as , neither male nor female .
On November 22 , 2016 , the District Court for the District of Colorado ruled in favor of Zzyym , stating that the State Department violated federal law .
The ruling stated that the court found " no evidence that the Department followed a rational decision - making process in deciding to implement its binary - only gender passport policy , " and ordered the U.S. Passport Agency to reconsider its earlier decision .
On June 10 , 2016 , an Oregon circuit court ruled that a resident , Jamie Shupe , could legally change their gender to non - binary .
Jamie Shupe was represented by civil rights lawyer Lake Perriguey .
The Transgender Law Center believes this to be " the first ruling of its kind in the U.S. " On September 26 , 2016 , intersex California resident Sara Kelly Keenan became the second person in the United States to legally change her gender to non - binary .
Keenan , who uses she / her pronouns and identifies as intersex " both as my medical reality and as my gender identification " , cited Shupe 's case as inspiration for her petition .
In December 2016 , Keenan became the first American recipient of a birth certificate with " intersex " listed under the category of " sex " .
In April 2017 , the second intersex birth certificate ( in which the recipient 's " sex " is listed as intersex ) in the United States was issued to non - binary intersex writer and activist Hida Viloria .
On June 15 , 2017 , Oregon became the first state in the U.S. to announce it will allow a non - binary " X " gender marker on state IDs and driver 's licenses , beginning July 1 .
No doctor 's note will be required for the change .
The following week , Washington D.C. announced that a non - binary " X " gender marker for district - issued ID cards and driver 's licenses would become available later in June , with no medical certification required .
The D.C. policy change went into effect on June 27 , making the district the first place in the U.S. to offer gender - neutral driver 's licenses and ID cards .
Also in June , legislation was introduced in New York to offer an " X " gender marker for residents ' ID cards .
In September 2017 , California passed legislation implementing a third , non - binary gender marker on California birth certificates , drivers ' licenses , and identity cards .
The bill , SB 179 , also removes the requirements for a physician 's statement and mandatory court hearing for gender change petitions .
The new designation will be available on California drivers ' licenses starting in 2019 .
In December 2017 , Washington state filed an adopted rule to allow a third , non - binary " X " gender marker on amended birth certificates , although certificates will still be initially issued with male or female designations ; the rule went into effect on January 27 , 2018 .
Oregon also allows a person to amend their birth certificate to include non - binary " X " gender marker as of January 1 , 2018 .
On June 11 , 2018 , Maine began allowing " X " gender markers on state IDs .
They are currently issuing stickers that read " Gender has been changed to X – Non - binary , " and will begin issuing IDs with " X " printed on them -- phasing out the stickers -- upon a system update planned for July 2019 .
On September 19 , 2018 , a federal judge ruled a 2nd time in favor of Dana Zzyym , deciding that the U.S. State Department refusal to give a passport exceed its authority .
Since at least October 2018 , Arkansas has been issuing driver 's licenses with an " X " gender marker upon request .
Arkansas has historically operated without a clear public policy for changing gender markers on IDs .
However , in December 2010 former Assistant Commissioner of Operations and Administration Mike Munns announced that Arkansas 's official policy would be to " allow a licensee to change their gender as requested , no questions asked , no documentation required . "
On November 30 , 2018 , Colorado began allowing people who do not identify as male or female to mark X as the gender identifier on their driver 's license .
Applicants who want to use the X on their driver 's licenses complete a form and get a signature from a medical provider or mental health counselor , but are not required to be undergoing any hormonal treatment or surgeries .
URUGUAY Section::::Uruguay .
Since 19 October 2018 , new law in Uruguay allows people to change their gender / sex entry on a self - determined basis , including other descriptions than male / female or man / woman , without requiring any medical documents .
The law also provides a basis for social protection , anti - discrimination efforts , quotas and reparations .
SEE ALSO
* Transgender rights
* Legal recognition of intersex people * Non - binary discrimination NOTES