THE WIFE ( 2017 FILM )
The Wife is a 2017 drama film directed by Björn Runge and written by Jane Anderson , based on the novel of the same name by Meg Wolitzer .
It stars Glenn Close , Jonathan Pryce , and Christian Slater , and follows a wife who questions her life choices as she travels to Stockholm with her narcissistic husband , who is set to receive the Nobel Prize in Literature .
The Wife premiered at the 2017 Toronto International Film Festival on 12 September 2017 , and was theatrically released in the United States on 17 August 2018 by Sony Pictures Classics .
It received positive reviews from critics , with major critical acclaim drawn towards Close 's performance which some considered to be the best of her career .
Close was nominated for several accolades including Golden Globe for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama , Critics ' Choice Movie Award for Best Actress and Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
This plot description is chronological , although major parts of the film are told in flashback .
In 1956 , Joan Archer ( Annie Starke ) meets Joseph Castleman ( Harry Lloyd ) , a handsome young married professor at a women - only college .
Although already an accomplished ( if unpublished ) writer , Joan is awed by Joseph 's force of personality and advice that " a writer must write " .
Joan meets a published alumni authoress ( Elizabeth McGovern ) , whose cynical views on opportunities for female writers disheartens Joan .
Two years later , Joseph has been fired for having an affair with Joan , his marriage is failing , and his first attempt at writing a novel turns out very poor .
Joan , a secretary at a publishing house , observes how the all - male editors dismiss women writers .
When Joan criticizes Joseph 's work , he threatens to end his relationship with her ( claiming she can not love " a hack " ) .
Joan agrees to fix Joseph 's novel for him .
The work , titled The Walnut , is published and becomes a bestseller .
By 1960 , Joseph and Joan are living in a large seaside home in Connecticut .
Joan is hard at work writing a novel , to be published under Joseph 's name , while Joseph supports her by cooking , cleaning , and caring for their first child , David .
As Joseph and Joan converse , it is apparent that Joan 's novel is a reflection of their life together , which bores Joan .
A narcissist , over the next four decades Joseph has several adulterous affairs , and tells everyone that Joan " does not write " .
By 1993 , an elderly Joseph ( Jonathan Pryce ) has become a celebrated author .
He wins the Nobel Prize in Literature , although Joan ( Glenn Close ) seems less than happy about the honor .
David ( Max Irons ) , who idolizes his father , seeks Joseph 's critique of and approval for his first short story , unaware that Joan has written all Joseph 's books .
Joseph , Joan , and David fly to Stockholm as Nathaniel Bone ( Christian Slater ) , a biographer with a taste for scandal , tries to insinuate himself into the Castlemans ' lives .
Joan 's unhappiness worsens as adulation is heaped on Joseph .
His attempts to publicly thank her for supporting him only embitter her further .
Nathaniel , sensing Joan 's emotional state , induces her to talk with him over drinks and says that he knows that Joan has ghostwritten a major portion or even all of each of Joseph 's novels .
Joan does not admit the truth , but Nathaniel is convinced by their conversation that he is correct .
Meanwhile , Joseph tries to seduce a beautiful young photographer ( Karin Franz Körlof ) who is assigned to him .
Joseph is unable to consummate the affair due to his cardiovascular disease .
Joseph accuses Joan of abandoning him , while Joan expresses her outrage over Joseph 's attempted affair .
The argument ceases when they learn that their daughter has given birth to a grandson .
The night of the Nobel Prize ceremony , David confronts his parents after being told by Nathaniel that Joan is the only writer in the family .
Joseph and Joan deny everything .
At the ceremony and banquet which follows , Joan becomes increasingly upset by the accolades showered on Joseph .
She flees and Joseph follows her .
He demands that she take his Nobel Prize , but she refuses .
At their hotel , Joan tells Joseph she is divorcing him .
They argue violently , and Joseph has a heart attack .
Prostrate on the bed , he begs for Joan 's love , and she tells him she loves him ; he replies , " You 're such a good liar , " and dies moments later .
On the airplane back to the United States , Nathaniel offers his condolences to Joan .
She tells him that if he tries to print anything that undermines Joseph 's reputation as a writer , she will sue him .
David overhears her .
Joan says that she will tell David and his sister the truth when they get home .
CAST * Glenn Close as Joan Castleman * Annie Starke as young Joan Castleman * Jonathan Pryce as Professor Joe Castleman
* Harry Lloyd as young Joe Castleman
* Christian Slater as Nathaniel Bone * Max Irons as David Castleman * Elizabeth McGovern as Elaine Mozell
* Alix Wilton Regan as Susannah Castleman PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On 16 May 2014 , it was reported that Glenn Close would star in an adaptation of the Meg Wolitzer novel The Wife .
The film was directed by Björn Runge and written by Jane Anderson .
On 30 January 2015 , Frances McDormand , Logan Lerman , Brit Marling , Jonathan Pryce , and Christian Slater were announced as having also been cast .
On 19 October 2016 , Pryce and Slater 's involvement was confirmed , and Elizabeth McGovern , Max Irons , and Close 's daughter Annie Starke joined the cast , playing the roles originally set with McDormand , Lerman , and Marling , respectively ; Harry Lloyd was also added .
Close approached Gary Oldman for the part of Joe Castleman but he was unavailable for the role .
The Wife shot scenes in Glasgow , Edinburgh , and Arbigland Estate in Dumfries .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
, The Wife has grossed $ 8.2 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 8.6 million in other territories , for a total worldwide of $ 16.8 million .
In its first weekend of limited release , The Wife grossed $ 111,137 from four theaters , for an average of $ 27,784 , the best of the weekend .
It expanded to 18 theaters in its second weekend , making $ 212,714 .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 84 % based on 185 reviews , and an average rating of 7.1/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " The Wife relies on the strength of Glenn Close 's performance to drive home the power of its story — and she proves thoroughly , grippingly up to the task .
"
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 77 out of 100 , based on 36 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Writing for Rolling Stone , Peter Travers gave the film four out of five stars , calling Close 's acting a " tour - de - force , " and saying she " takes it to the next level with a powerfully implosive performance that doubles as an accumulation of details that define a marriage .
She never telegraphs Joan 's feelings , letting them unravel slowly as we watch her attend parties as a buildup to the big night .
" The chief film critic for The Observer Mark Kermode described the movie as a " Stockholm syndrome with a twist " , while Glenn Close , interviewed by Robbie Collin for Irish Independent , described it as " part - period piece , part - love story , part - Bergmanesque drama – so much so the latter that it could have been called Scenes from a Marriage .
" Citing the screening coordinator Peggy Siegal , Bill McCuddy of the Gold Derby called The Wife " the perfect " ' # MeToo ' film " and defined it an Oscar bait .
San Diego Reader writer Scott Marks gave the film 1/5 stars and criticized the film 's simplicity , writing : " It might not have been so bad had the road to the big reveal been paved with insight and originality , but other than the performances , there is nothing here audiences have n't seen more times than they have their own feet . "
Writing for Metro , Richard von Busack criticized the films ideological agenda writing : "
What makes The Wife insufferable soap is the masochistic insistence that the men are all crushers , and that that 's all that 's possible for them to do . "
ACCOLADES Film by the Sea International Festival !
scope="row " rowspan="1 " AACTA International Awards
rowspan=17 Glenn Close ! scope="row " rowspan="1 " Critics ' Choice Movie Awards !
scope="row " rowspan="1 " Dallas – Fort Worth Film Critics Association ! scope="row " rowspan="1 " Florida Film Critics Circle !
scope="row " rowspan="1 " Gotham Awards !
scope="row " rowspan="1 " Golden Globe Awards !
scope="row " rowspan="1 " Hollywood Film Awards !
scope="row " Houston Film Critics Society !
scope="row " Independent Spirit Awards ! scope="row " rowspan="1 " London Film Critics ' Circle ! scope="row
" rowspan="1 " New Mexico Film Critics Association Awards !
scope="row " Palm Springs International Film Festival !
scope="row " San Diego Film Critics SocietySatellite AwardsScreen Actors Guild Awards !
scope="row " St. Louis Gateway Film Critics AssociationWashington D.C. Area Film Critics Association REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS