WHITE HOUSE FAMILY THEATER
The White House Family Theater is a small movie theater located in the White House in Washington , D.C. for the use of the president and his family .
Originally there was no room in the White House specifically for screening films , so the present venue was converted from a cloakroom in 1942 .
It is able to seat 42 people .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The White House Family Theater is located in the East Wing of the White House .
The first film screened in the White House was Birth of a Nation in 1915 ; however , early film viewings occurred in the main building as the facility lacked a dedicated theater .
Originally a cloakroom known as the " Hat Box " , the White House Family Theater was converted into its current use in 1942 on the orders of Franklin Roosevelt .
Traditionally , American studios have made their films available to the White House on request , either directly or through the Motion Picture Association of America .
Landing a screening in the White House Family Theater is considered a valuable marketing tool by studios and , during the 1980s , the motion picture industry financed renovation of the facility , which added terraced seating and other amenities .
During the presidency of George W. Bush the facility was redecorated in " movie palace red " .
In addition to its use screening films , the theater has also been used by presidents to rehearse speeches .
FILMS VIEWED Section::::Films viewed .
As of 1988 , Jimmy Carter had viewed more films in the White House Family Theater than any other person , having watched 480 films in the facility during his four - year term beginning with All The President 's Men .
According to a list of film screenings obtained under a Freedom of Information Act request filed by Gizmodo , the first film watched by Bill Clinton in the White House Family Theater was Lorenzo 's Oil on January 27 , 1993 .
The final film watched was Chocolat on January 6 , 2001 .
The first film screened during the presidency of Donald Trump was Finding Dory .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
The White House Family Theater has a seating capacity of 42 .
REFERENCES