WHAT THE HEALTH
What the Health is a 2017 documentary film which critiques the health impact of meat and dairy products consumption , and questions the practices of the leading health and pharmaceutical organizations .
Its primary purpose is to advocate for a plant - based diet .
The documentary has been criticized by a number of medical doctors , dietitians , and investigative journalists for what they describe as confusing causation with correlation , cherry picking science studies , using biased sources , distorting study findings , and using " weak - to - non - existent data " .
SYNOPSIS
Section::::Synopsis .
Advertised as " The Health Film
That Health Organizations Do n't Want You To See " , the film follows Kip Andersen as he interviews physicians and other individuals regarding diet and health .
Andersen is also shown attempting to contact representatives of various health organizations , but comes away dissatisfied with their responses .
Through other interviews he examines the alleged connection between the meat , dairy , and pharmaceutical industries , as well as various health organizations .
The synopsis is that serious health problems are a consequence of consuming meat and dairy products , and that a conspiracy exists to cover this up .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
What the Health was written , produced , and directed by Kip Andersen and Keegan Kuhn , the production team for the documentary Cowspiracy .
What the Health was funded via an Indiegogo campaign in March 2016 , raising more than $ 235,000 .
The film was released globally on Vimeo on March 16 , 2017 , and screenings licensed through Tugg Inc. FEATURED INDIVIDUALS
Section::::Featured individuals .
The following doctors were featured in the film : * Milton Mills ( physician , plant - based advocate , author ) * Garth Davis ( bariatric surgeon , plant - based advocate , author ) * Michael Greger ( physician , vegetarianism advocate , author ) * Michael Klaper ( physician , veganism advocate , author )
* Neal Barnard ( clinical researcher , author , founder of vegan - advocacy group PCRM )
* Caldwell Esselstyn ( physician , vegetarianism advocate , author )
* Kim A. Williams ( cardiologist , president of ACC )
* John McDougall ( physician , vegetarian food company owner , author )
A number of non - physicians were also interviewed : *
Michele Simon ( public health lawyer , author )
* Steve - O
( comedian , actor in Jackass )
* Ryan Shapiro ( historian of national security , MIT ) * David Carter ( former NFL defensive lineman ) * Timothy Shieff ( world champion freerunner , Ninja Warrior )
* Tia Blanco ( professional surfer , double ISA World Surfing champion ) RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The documentary has drawn criticism from many , including scientific skeptics , who contend that it misrepresents facts : * On July 3 , 2017 , medical doctor and founder of Turntable Health , Zubin Damania , acting in his ZDoggMD persona , reviewed What the Health on his YouTube channel .
Damania agreed with the documentary 's assertion that a diet heavy in processed food was associated with negative health effects and that the Food and Drug Administration sometimes offered " stupid nutrition recommendations " regarding recommending a uniform solution for everyone .
However , he also commented in detail on what he characterized as frequent confirmation bias and cherry - picking of selected data , as well as the oversimplification of complex health issues and rampant misinformation which he observed in the documentary .
He also highlighted what he saw as the ridiculous claim made of " institutionalized racism " on the part of the dairy industry .
Damania concluded in exasperation : " that was the stupidest [ expletive ] thing I 've ever seen ...
I feel like I 've lost [ expletive ] brain cells " .
Joel Kahn , a cardiologist featured in the film , responded to ZDoggMD 's video via a Medium article titled " Why ZDoggMD and His Toilet Humor Are Best Flushed and Forgotten " .
*
On July 11 , 2017 , medical doctor and scientific skeptic Harriet Hall , known as the SkepDoc , reviewed the documentary on Science - Based Medicine .
Her opinion was summarized as follows : " What the Health espouses the fairy tale that all major diseases ... can be prevented and cured by eliminating meat and dairy from the diet .
It is a blatant polemic for veganism , biased and misleading , and is not a reliable source of scientific information .
" At the end of her article she concludes by asserting positive aspects of a plant based diet with " There are undisputed health advantages to a plant - based diet ... " and " We as a society should eat more plant foods ... " but counterpoints this with " ...
the evidence is insufficient to recommend that everyone adopt a vegan diet " and " we need n't entirely reject all animal foods " .
Finally , she recommends moderation in all things .
*
On July 20 , 2017 , emeritus professor in nutrition Martijn Katan from Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam called the film " propaganda " , which exaggerates the health risks of meat , eggs and dairy , and rather dangerously claims veganism prevents or cures just about any disease , like cancer or diabetes .
However , he stressed that everyone should eat less meat than the population currently does on average , and that going completely vegan can be a healthy lifestyle if you make sure you get all nutrients you need ( though this is hard to do for young children , for whom he did not recommend a vegan diet ) and it 's also good for the environment .
* Sarah Berry , Lifestyle Health Editor for The Sydney Morning Herald commented that " What the Health does make some valid points including concerns about the influence of Big Food on dietary recommendations and about poor farming practices , which can be both inhumane and bad for the planet , " adding that " The makers cherry - pick science , use biased sources , distort study findings and use " weak - to - non - existent data ...
" Berry quoted Dr. Joanna McMillan as saying that " To me it 's the usual product of those who are filmmakers and not nutrition scientists or trained in any aspect of medicine or science , therefore not trained or qualified to make sense of scientific research . "
*
In a review of the film , investigative journalist Nina Teicholz on DietDoctor.com praised the filmmakers ' skills of persuasion , but concluded that the film 's claims are not backed by scientific evidence .
*
On August 8 , 2017 , writing for Quartz magazine , Chase Purdy said that " By cherry - picking nutrition studies to make rickety claims , the makers of What the Health risk ratcheting up fear of certain foods based on weak science .
It 's not a responsible way to try and change people 's behavior , and it does a disservice to nutritional scientists in the field . "
BOOK Section::::Book .
A companion book of the same name was released February 2017 .
It was authored by Eunice Wong , who is married to journalist Chris Hedges .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS