MIDDLE - EARTH :
SHADOW OF WAR Middle - earth : Shadow of War is an action role - playing video game developed by Monolith Productions and published by
Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment .
It is the sequel to 2014 's , and was released worldwide for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 4 , and Xbox One on October 10 , 2017 .
Shadow of War continues the previous game 's narrative , which is based on J. R. R. Tolkien 's legendarium and set between the events of The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings .
Like its predecessor , the game also takes heavy inspiration from director Peter Jackson 's The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings film adaptations .
The player continues the story of the ranger Talion and the spirit of the elf lord Celebrimbor , who shares Talion 's body , as they forge a new Ring of Power to amass an army to fight against Sauron .
The game builds upon the " Nemesis System " introduced in Shadow of Mordor , allowing Talion to gain followers from several races of Middle - earth , including Uruks and Ologs , and plan out complex strategies using these to complete missions .
Shadow of War had a generally positive reaction from critics , albeit more mixed than its predecessor ; praise was aimed towards the gameplay and an improved nemesis system , although story elements and changes made to established characters received some negative reactions , as well as the inclusion of microtransactions and loot boxes .
A free - to - play companion game for iOS and Android devices was also released .
In July 2018 , Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment removed all microtransactions from the console / PC versions of Shadow of War .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
Middle - earth : Shadow of War is an action role - playing game set in an open world environment and played from a third - person perspective , following from its predecessor .
The player controls the game 's protagonist Talion , who has several natural athletic and combat abilities as a ranger of Gondor , but also has unique abilities provided by the spirit of the elf lord Celebrimbor , with whom he shares his body .
The player uses their combined abilities to complete various missions , typically aimed to disrupt the armies of Sauron .
The game includes main quests that drive the game 's narrative , and numerous optional quests that can help the player boost Talion 's abilities and Followers via the game 's " Nemesis System " .
In contrast to the previous game , which was more of a hack and slash , the game has an action role - playing approach , creating a more personalized experience for each player .
It also features a dynamic weather system as well as day - night cycle which affects the gameplay and enemy behavior .
The Nemesis System expands upon its introduction in Shadow of Mordor to apply to a larger part of the world , including other characters called Followers that have behavior guided by how the player - character has interacted with them .
The player is able to transfer their top Nemesis and their most loyal follower from Shadow of Mordor into Shadow of War .
It also includes a garrison from which the player can access their Followers that has either been obtained from multiplayer , relocated with a reassignment order or through opening ' War chests ' prior to the game 's July update , it also contains loot boxes that players have already obtained , players ' unused loot boxes that have been obtained prior to the removal of the market still remains .
The Garrison also contains training orders that are purchaseable with Mirian , it 's in - game currency . "
Spoils of War " and " XP " boosts are still available and can be activated but not obtainable as of the July 17th patch , although , players ' boosts prior to the update are still available .
The game 's multiplayer features a " Social Conquest mode " , in which players are able to invade other players ' fortresses and attempt to conquer them .
This mode has two settings : friendly and ranked .
Friendly allows the player to invade someone 's fortress , without the risk of losing your army .
Ranked , on the other hand , allows the player to invade , but with a risk of losing some of their Orc Followers permanently .
MOBILE VERSIONS
Section::::Mobile versions .
The mobile companion versions of Shadow of War are played as a real - time strategy role - playing game from a top - down perspective , where players can recruit characters from not only the console / PC versions of the game itself , but also characters from its 2014 predecessor Shadow of Mordor and even The Lord of the Rings film trilogy to fight Sauron 's forces in small - scale , action - packed battles .
Like the console / PC versions of the game , players can make use of the Nemesis system to gain extra advantages in battle , as well as make optional in - game purchases .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Shadow of War continues the narrative from Shadow of Mordor , following Talion who is still infused with the spirit of the elf lord Celebrimbor .
Talion and Celebrimbor travel to Mt. Doom , where they forge a new Ring of Power free of Sauron 's corruption .
However , once the Ring is complete , Celebrimbor is abducted and held hostage by Shelob , who asks Talion to hand over the Ring in exchange for Celebrimbor .
Talion reluctantly agrees and gives the Ring to Shelob , who claims they have a common enemy in Sauron .
She uses the Ring to see into the future and directs Talion to the last Gondorian stronghold in Mordor , Minas Ithil , which is under siege by Sauron 's forces due to the city 's possession of a valuable Palantir .
The Palantir would allow whoever possesses it to see anything they wish , making it a valuable tool for Celebrimbor and a dangerous weapon for Sauron .
Talion travels to Minas Ithil and quickly comes to odds with Celebrimbor .
Talion wants to help his fellow Gondorians , while Celebrimbor believes the city is already lost and the retrieval of the Palantir must take priority .
Talion reasons that protecting Minas Ithil will also protect the Palantir and he meets up with the city 's defenders : General Castamir , his daughter Idril , and his lieutenant Baranor .
Together , they sabotage Orcish efforts to break into the city until Castamir betrays them , allowing the Orcs to breach the gates and handing over the Palantir to the Witch King of Angmar in return for sparing Idril .
Castamir is killed by the Witch King and Talion is barely able to escape thanks to the help of Eltariel , an Elven assassin working on Galadriel 's behalf .
The Witch King seizes Minas Ithil , renaming it Minas Morgul .
With the Palantir , Sauron realizes that Shelob is holding Celebrimbor 's Ring and sends the Nazgûl to attack her .
Talion is able to save Shelob , who returns the Ring to him and tells him that the fate of Middle - earth is in his hands .
With the Ring back in his possession , Talion begins to use its power to dominate Orcs and build his army .
During this time , he assists Idril and Baranor in rescuing Gondorian survivors , helps the nature spirit Carnan defeat the Balrog Tar Goroth and the necromancer Zog , is betrayed by one of his followers , and hunts the Nazgûl alongside Eltariel .
Eventually , Talion builds up enough strength to assault Sauron 's fortress directly .
During the battle , Talion faces Isildur , now corrupted into a Nazgûl .
Talion manages to defeat Isildur , but upon seeing his memories of how he was corrupted by the One Ring , decides to destroy Isildur and release his spirit rather than dominate him .
Celebrimbor remarks angrily that Isildur would have been a valuable asset to their cause , leading Talion to realize that Celebrimbor wishes to replace Sauron by dominating him rather than destroying him .
Talion refuses to follow Celebrimbor 's orders any more , causing the wraith to abandon him and possess Eltariel instead .
Without Celebrimbor or the ring , Talion begins to die , but is visited by Shelob in a vision .
Shelob informs him that if Talion had gone on to fight Sauron , they would have succeeded and Celebrimbor would have enslaved Sauron and marched on the rest of Middle - earth .
She implores Talion to continue to fight to contain the darkness within Mordor .
Deciding to put his fate in his own hands , Talion picks up the Ring of Power Isildur was wearing to preserve his own life .
He then uses the power of Isildur 's Ring to assault and seize Minas Morgul , defeating the Witch King in the process .
Talion then takes possession of the Palantir and observes Celebrimbor and Eltariel making their assault on Sauron .
The two manage to gain the upper hand and Celebrimbor attempts to dominate Sauron , only for Sauron to cut off two of Eltariel 's fingers , one of which is adorned with the Ring of Power , and merge himself with Celebrimbor .
As a result , Sauron and Celebrimbor remain trapped in Sauron 's tower in the form of a flaming eye as their spirits continue to battle for dominance .
Talion decides to use Minas Morgul as a fortress to keep Sauron 's forces contained in Mordor .
Decades later , Talion succumbs to the corruption of Isildur 's Ring , and joins Sauron 's forces as a Nazgûl , where he goes with the others to hunt Frodo and the One Ring .
However , with the destruction of Sauron and the One Ring , Talion dies with the rest of the Nazgûl and his spirit is freed .
He is last seen in the afterlife discarding his weapons and armor as he walks off into the west .
BLADE OF GALADRIEL Section::::Blade of Galadriel .
Following the final battle between Celebrimbor and Sauron , Eltariel recovers Celebrimbor 's Ring , and receives orders from Galadriel to continue hunting the remaining Nazgûl , including Talion .
Eltariel reluctantly confronts Talion , who manages to convince her that by working together , they can keep Sauron 's influence contained within Mordor .
However , he informs her that a new warchief is leading a massive army and has attacked many of his fortresses .
Talion tasks Eltariel with defending one of his remaining forts while he goes to defend another fort in Seregost .
Eltarial manages to recruit several new tribes of orcs to fight for her and
she successfully defends her fort from enemy attack , though Seregost falls .
A pair of rogue Nazgûl arrive , revealing they are the ones leading the new orc army as they plan to take advantage of Sauron and the Witch - King 's weakness to take over Middle - earth .
After rendering Seregost uninhabitable with poison gas , Eltariel and Talion pursue the Nazgûl twins to their stronghold , where Eltariel is able to defeat both of them .
Despite their defeat , Talion begins to succumb to the temptation of Isildur 's Ring , forcing Eltariel to battle him .
Though Eltariel is victorious , Talion tells her that he will inevitably be resurrected by Sauron .
Afterwards , Eltariel continues to battle the forces of Mordor until she witnesses the destruction of the One Ring .
Upon seeing Celebrimbor 's spirit freed from Sauron , Eltariel decides to go track him down .
DESOLATION OF MORDOR Section::::Desolation of Mordor .
After the fall of Minas Ithil , Baranor journeys through Mordor seeking to hire mercenaries to help him seize the fortress of Shindram .
On the way , he is attacked by wyrms and rescued by the dwarf Torvin , who helps develop gadgets for Baranor such as a grappling hook and parachute .
Baranor continues to the Vanishing Sons mercenary camp , where he discovers they are led by his older brother Jagai , who now goes by the name of Serka .
Serka reluctantly agrees to help Barbara take Shindram in return for all of the loot stored inside .
However , another mercenary , Zhoja , betrays Serka and hands him over to the orcs .
Baranor rescues Serka , who reasserts control over the Vanishing Sons and executes Zhoja .
After repelling an orc attack , Baranor and Serka lead their army and seize Shindram .
However , rather than hold the fortress , they leave a trap for the orcs sent to retake it .
Baranor and Serka then leave to seize more fortresses , deciding that Gorgoroth will be their next target .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Creative Director Michael de Plater said that the development of Shadow of Mordor was a learning study for Monolith in how to make open world games , and the development team limited themselves in the scope of what they could deliver for that game .
With those lessons learned , de Plater said that Monolith was able to take a bolder step forward for Shadow of War , saying " [ t]his was our ambition to do the big , blockbuster version of the ideas we 'd begun to explore in the first game .
It 's kind of our Terminator 2 to Terminator . "
Monolith wanted to move the game from the more solitary player experience to one that captured the epic battles shown in The Lord of the Rings films .
They created battle systems that enable large - scale battles where parts of the battle would be managed by the various Followers that the player has recruited , thus allowing the player to still focus on the violence and brutality of close - quarter combat .
Recognizing the violence inherent with the Middle - earth setting , Monolith aimed to include light humorous elements that play off the thirst for violence that the orcs have , so that the game would not " wallow in it , or feel sadistic " .
The console / PC versions were later confirmed to be rated Mature by the ESRB , like their predecessor , although the mobile versions are less violent and were given the milder Teen rating .
DEATH OF MICHAEL FORGEY Section::::Death of Michael Forgey .
On March 3 , 2016 , Monolith 's Executive Producer , Michael David Forgey , died of cancer .
To commemorate the loss of Shadow of Wars Executive Producer , Monolith and Warner Bros announced a DLC named " Forthog Orc - Slayer " .
Originally selling for $ 5 , Warner Brothers promised to donate $ 3.50 of the proceeds from each sale of the DLC made from any of the majority of the U.S. states to the Forgey family through December 31 , 2019 .
Warner Brothers was criticized for attempting to cash in on Michael Forgey 's death .
Following public backlash , on September 27 , 2017 , the DLC was made free to all who purchased the game and all proceeds were refunded to those who purchased it beforehand , in favor of Warner Bros making a lump sum donation to the Forgey family .
RELEASE Section::::Release .
Shadow of War was released for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 4 , and Xbox One .
The Play
Anywhere feature extends to Microsoft 's premium console , the Xbox One X.
The title was originally scheduled to be released in August 2017 , but in June of that year , Warner Bros. Interactive announced that the release would be put off for two months , until October 10 , 2017 , to make sure the game meets " the highest quality experience " for players .
Despite this delay , the mobile companion versions of Shadow of War were released on September 28 , 2017 , ahead of the console / PC versions .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
Middle - earth : Shadow of War received " generally favorable " reviews from critics , according to review aggregator Metacritic .
IGN gave a positive review stating that the game was " bigger and more ambitious in scope than Shadow of Mordor , with great results " especially praising the nemesis system , the battles and the multiplayer .
However , GameSpot gave a more critical review , " It tries to be larger than its predecessor
, there are more abilities , more weapons , more Orcs , yet it leaves you wanting less .
" It specifically criticized " the storefront and the menus and loot system " but summed up " at its core , it 's a fun experience with brilliant moments " .
Another unfavorable review came from The Independent , publishing a review titled " A Disappointing Sequel " .
Critic Jack Shepherd criticized the uninvolving story , stating that " by the end , you only care about rival Orcs and not the story .
A shame considering the Lord of the Rings has , and remains , one of the greatest tales ever told . "
Entertainment Weekly ranked the game eighth on their list of the " Best Games of 2017 " , and GamesRadar+ ranked it 18th on their list of the 25 Best Games of 2017 , while EGMNow ranked it 15th on their list of the 25 Best Games of 2017 .
The game won the award for " Best Action Game " in IGN 's Best of 2017 Awards , whereas its other nominations were for " Best PC Game " and " Best Xbox One Game " .
It was also nominated for " Best Action Game " and " Best Open World Game " in PC Gamers 2017 Game of the Year Awards .
It won the award for " Best Combat " in Game Informers 2017 Action Game of the Year Awards .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Year ! !
Award ! !
Category ! !
Result ! !
Ref .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS