BLACK CARD ( MASTERCARD )
Black Card LLC is an American financial services company that offers the Black Card ( MasterCard ) , a rewards credit card issued by Barclays Bank Delaware .
As of 2015 , the card has an annual membership fee of $ 495 for the account holder , and $ 195 for every additional authorized user on the account .
In 2015 , the Black Card was rebranded from Visa to a MasterCard .
FEATURES Section::::Features .
Holders of the stainless steel card receive membership perks including cash - back bonuses , a 24/7 concierge service , gifts , worldwide acceptance , and Luxury Magazine , a members - only quarterly magazine in print and digital form , similar to AmEx 's Black Card 's Black Ink and Centurion magazines .
The concierge service offers a wide variety of services including entertainment planning , business services , gift arrangement , travel information , and assistance .
The company also offers travel insurance for luggage , trip interruption / cancellation , rental car damages , warranty manager service , and purchase security on up to $ 500 per claim .
The $ 495 annual fee gives members limited enrollment in the VIP lounge program that provides access to many airport lounges .
IN MEDIA Section::::In media .
In early 2009 , the card 's New York Times full - page ad was the focus of a Stephen Colbert segment pretending to misunderstand the name as racial .
The Black Card has also been featured as a high - end credit card in Vegas Magazine , Ocean Drive , Capitol File , and LA Confidential .
TIME Magazine dubbed the Black Card one of the " 5 Credit Cards
You Do n't Want In Your Wallet .
"
Citing CardHub , the magazine called the Black Card the worst general consumer credit card as a result of its membership fee .
Consumerism Commentary contrasts that the card 's fee offsets the cutback rewards and concierge services .
BLACK CARD VS .
AMEX
BLACK CARD
Section::::Black Card vs. AmEx Black Card .
Black Card LLC successfully registered " Black Card " as a U.S. trademark in 2009 .
However , American Express offers its own exclusive black - colored card called the Centurion Card , which it contended was widely known as " the Black Card " before the launch of the Black Card ( then Visa card ) , despite never seeking to trademark that name itself .
American Express filed suit against Black Card LLC in February 2010 , claiming that the trademark was obtained improperly and sought injunctive relief .
This suit was concluded in November 2011 , with the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York ruling that Black Card , LLC 's trademark of the name " Black Card " should be canceled on grounds that it was merely descriptive .
( See also American Express Marketing and Development Corp , et al .
v. Black Card , LLC , 2011 U.S. Dist .
LEXIS 133151
( S.D.N.Y. November 17 , 2011 . )
Today , it uses the registered trademark under license .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * BlackCard.com * LuxuryMagazine.com