TROY : FALL OF A CITY Troy : Fall of a City is a British - American miniseries based on the Trojan War and the love affair between Paris and Helen .
The show tells the story of the 10 year siege of Troy , set in the 13th century BC .
The series was commissioned by BBC One and is a co - production between BBC One and Netflix , with BBC One airing the show on 17 February 2018 in the United Kingdom , and Netflix streaming the show internationally outside the UK .
Despite high expectations , the show 's Saturday night primetime slot , and its £ 16 million budget ,
Troy : Fall of a City was a ratings disaster for the BBC , with only 3.2 million viewers tuning in for the first episode and viewership dropping to only 1.6 million by episode four .
Nonetheless , it received generally favourable reviews from critics , with specific praise focusing on its acting , costuming , set design , its more thoughtful , psychologically complicated interpretation of the Trojan War , its portrayal of Helen , and its inclusion of the Greek gods .
It did receive criticism for its dialogue , which some critics regarded as poorly written .
Its relatively close portrayal of the war to the traditional retellings was praised by some as faithfulness to the original myths and criticized by others as lack of originality .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
The story of the 10 year siege of Troy by the Greeks is told after the young prince of Troy , Paris , has an affair with Helen of Troy , the wife of the Greek king .
CAST
* Louis Hunter as Paris * Bella Dayne as Helen of Troy * David Threlfall as Priam * Frances O'Connor as Hecuba
* Tom Weston - Jones as Hector
* Joseph Mawle as Odysseus
* Chloe Pirrie as Andromache
* Johnny Harris as Agamemnon
* David Gyasi as Achilles * Jonas Armstrong as Menelaus * Alfred Enoch as Aeneas
* Aimee - Ffion Edwards as Cassandra
* Hakeem Kae - Kazim as Zeus
* Chris Fisher as Deiphobus
* Christiaan Schoombie as Troilus
* Alex Lanipekun as Pandarus * Jonathan Pienaar as Litos * David Avery as Xanthias * Lex King as Aphrodite * Amy Louise Wilson as Briseis * Inge Beckmann as Hera
* Shamilla Miller as Athena * Diarmaid Murtagh as Hermes
* Thando Hopa as Artemis
* Nina Milner as Penthesilea
* Grace Hogg - Robinson as Hermione
* Jovan Muthray as Kaidas PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The series was filmed in Cape Town and consists of eight episodes .
It is written by David Farr , Nancy Harris , Mika Watkins , and Joe Barton , and directed by Owen Harris and Mark Brozel .
EPISODES CHANGES FROM EARLIER ADAPTATIONS Section::::Changes from earlier adaptations .
The show makes a number of alterations from the original Greek texts , as well as departures from earlier modern adaptations of the legend .
For instance , it vilifies Menelaus , proposes a resolution to Briseis 's captivity , and omits Aeneas 's identity as the son of Aphrodite .
The show also omits the final reconciliation between Achilles and Agamemnon from the Iliad , instead replacing this with Agamemnon resorting to " ignoble trickery " .
It also reimagines the circumstances of the Trojan Horse stratagem by making it be filled with grain for the starving city , thus making the Trojans more likely to bring it in .
More significantly , it also incorporates myths about the lead - up to the war and about the backgrounds of the major characters that are not found in the Iliad and are not normally included in most modern adaptations .
One of the show 's most radical changes from earlier adaptations was its decision to include the Greek gods as human - like characters played by live actors who speak normal dialogue .
While the gods are major figures in the original Homeric epics , ever since the mid - twentieth century , adaptations of the Trojan War have nearly always either removed the gods from the story or heavily reduced their role in it .
Most twenty - first - century adaptations of the Trojan War , including the film
Troy ( 2004 ) , Alessandro Baricco 's Iliad ( 2004 ) , Margaret George 's Helen of Troy ( 2006 ) , and Alice Oswald 's Memorial ( 2011 ) omit them entirely .
The gods play an active role in the show for the first half of the series , but they recede into the background halfway through after Zeus orders them to stop intervening in the war .
Zeus does give this command in the original Iliad , but it is almost immediately violated and eventually repealed entirely .
The most controversial change was the showrunners ' decision to cast David Gyasi , a black actor , as Achilles and Hakeem Kae - Kazim , another black actor , as Zeus .
These decisions resulted in almost immediate backlash as both roles are traditionally portrayed by white actors .
Several classical scholars defended the production , arguing that black people existed in ancient Greece and that the ancient Greeks did not have a concept of " race " .
Tim Whitmarsh , a professor of Greek culture at the University of Cambridge , stated , " Our best estimate is that the Greeks would be a spectrum of hair colours and skin types in antiquity .
I do n't think there 's any reason to doubt they were Mediterranean in skin type ( lighter than some and darker than other Europeans ) , with a fair amount of inter - mixing . "
He also added that there is no single , absolutely definitive version of the Trojan War story : " Homer 's poems are merely one version and the Greeks themselves understood the story could change ...
There 's never been an authentic retelling of the Iliad and the Odyssey – they 've always been fluid texts .
They 're not designed to be set in stone and it 's not blasphemous to change them . "
RECEPTION RATINGS Section::::Reception .
Section::::Ratings .
The show was a ratings disaster .
Despite its Saturday night primetime slot and each episode 's £ 2 million budget , the first episode aired to an audience of only 3.2 million viewers , while other shows in the same time slot have easily surpassed 5 million .
By episode four , the viewership had dropped to only 1.6 million .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an critics ' approval rating of 67 % based on 15 reviews , and an average rating of 5.67/10 , indicating generally favourable reviews .
The critics ' consensus reads : "
Troy : Fall of a City never tries to reinvent the bronze wheel but succeeds in engaging audiences with both royal and divine intrigue , making for a highly enjoyable romp in the lost kingdom . "
In a 16 February 2018 review for The Independent , Jacob Stolworthy praised the series for its willingness to alter the myths to explain or remove illogical aspects , as well as Louis Hunter 's acting in his lead role as Paris .
He also praised the show 's elaborate costuming , " its lavish set design , production values and sci - fi soundtrack " , commenting , " Viewers are immediately transported to ancient locations ( in actuality beautiful Cape Town ) in scene one and never relents .
If it 's escapism you 're wanting , series link away . "
He criticized the first episode , however , for seeming " too tame " in light of the numerous early comparisons to HBO 's Game of Thrones .
In an 18 February review for The Guardian , Euan Ferguson praised the show for its faithfulness to the original myths and for its strong portrayal of Helen , which he stated stood in stark contrast to the demure portrayal of the character by Diane Kruger in the 2004 Hollywood blockbuster film Troy , which had starred Brad Pitt as Achilles .
Ferguson compared Troy :
Fall of a City favourably to Game of Thrones and commented that the show will " hopefully expunge any residual memories of the 2004 Brad Pitt epic " .
He comments , " ... older viewers can marvel at the silked lushness of the sea scenes while revelling in an old tale
well told , younger ones can learn a little , about the names of the gods , and the fire - haunted dreams of Cassandra , and about mankind 's ancient rush towards betrayal . "
A review from the same day by Rupert Hawksley for The Daily Telegraph tentatively praised Troy :
Fall of a City for its more thoughtful , psychologically complicated interpretation of the Trojan War in sharp contrast to the 2004 film Troy , which Hawksley derided as a " shallow flex - fest " .
Nonetheless , Hawksley criticized the characters ' occasionally stilted dialogue .
He concluded , " Troy : Fall of a City might just be a fresh , psychologically knotty take on one of the greatest tales of them all . "
Also on the same day , Camilla Long , reviewing for The Sunday Times , panned the show , writing , "
Troy : Fall of a City , a reworking of the oldest drive - by in history ,
is so far removed from anything Sophocles might recognize , they should have named it The Real Housewives of Ilium . "
In a 24 February review for The Spectator , James Walton dismissed the script as " pitched somewhere between a particularly corny Hollywood epic and a play by Ernie Wise " , while the dialogue was pronounced " staggeringly creaky and endlessly bathetic . "
Walton goes on : " ' How did you two get together ? '
Paris asked Helen and Menelaus at the banquet given in his honour .
[ ... ] Impressively , the dialogue even managed to descend into cliché when nobody was actually using any words — as in the scene where the two defeated goddesses from the beauty contest went for one of those anguished bellows that causes all the nearby birds to fly theatrically from the trees . "
A review from 28 February by Rachel Cooke for New Statesman panned the show , complaining that " all the men look as if they 're in a Calvin Klein ad " , that the dialogue is unrealistic , and that its portrayal of Helen and Paris 's relationship is " tediously 21st century " .
Cooke concludes : " The dialogue is so richly silted with self - help banalities , we might as well be watching a Meghan and Harry biopic as a drama inspired by the greatest of all epic poems .
There 's also something exceedingly creepy about its retro , soft - porny direction ( by Owen Harris ) ; every time Helen takes a shower , you half expect her to whip out a Flake . "
In a 8 April review for IndieWire , Steve Greene criticized the show for telling the same story that has been told thousands of times before and offering very little innovation .
He concludes : " The result is a series more competent than compelling .
The tiny diversions from the norm seem thrilling by comparison " .
He did , however , offer extended praise for David Gyasi 's performance as Achilles and Joseph Mawle 's performance as Odysseus and for the show 's creators ' unusual decision to include the gods in the show .
In an unreservedly positive review for Buffalo News on 26 May 2018 , Randy Schiff praised the show for its pace and acting , commenting specifically on Hunter , Dayne , Gyasi , Mawle , O'Connor , and Threlfall 's performances .
He also lauded the portrayal of Helen as a " stately and intelligent " woman whose " deep desire for independence " is only satisfied once she goes to Troy , where women are valued just as much as men .
He also expressed wonderment at the show 's portrayal of the Greek deities , writing , " I found myself especially mesmerized by the show 's eerie presentation of deities : here , spectacularly partisan goddesses strut across raging battlefields , while a world - weary Zeus ( Hakeem Kae - Kazim ) remains resolutely neutral amidst the chaos . "
Andrea Tallarita defended the show in a 28 June 2018 review for PopMatters , arguing that the show 's commercial failure may have been partially a result of the viewing audience 's ignorance of the original classical texts , which the show treated with surprising fidelity .
She generally praised the show , stating that it has " a dignified life of [ its ] own " , but she criticized the decision to make the gods less involved for the second half of the series , as well as the fact that the show limited itself to only include a small number of especially important deities rather than the vast pantheon appearing in the Iliad , calling this decision " such a wasted opportunity " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS