FRED SIRIEIX Fred Sirieix is a French Maître d'hôtel best known for appearing on Channel 4 's First Dates .
Sirieix grew up in Limoges , France and trained to work in front of house in a Michelin - starred restaurant in France before working at La Tante Claire in London .
He is currently the general manager of Michelin - starred restaurant Galvin at Windows at the London Hilton .
Sirieix is the founder of National Waiters Day , the training tool the Art of Service as well as the Galvin Cup and Galvin 's Chance charities .
Sirieix also helped to launch the Right Course which teaches prisoners about the service industry .
He has also released a book called First Dates : The Art of Love and a music track , La Vie Continue .
He has also recently been featured in a show with Gordon Ramsay and Gino D'Campo on Channel 4 , entitled Gordon Gino and Fred : Road Trip .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Sirieix was brought up in Limoges , France .
His parents both worked in healthcare and says they inspired him to work in the service industry : " The conversation around the dinner table was all about patient care .
It was about making sure people had a good experience . "
CAREER
Section::::Career .
Sirieix began his career in the food industry at catering college , receiving some training as a chef , before quickly deciding to focus on front of house and trained at a Michelin - starred restaurant in France , before moving to London restaurant La Tante Claire where he worked as Chef de Rang .
Following this , he worked at Le Gavroche , Sartoria and Brasserie Roux .
He is currently general manager at Galvin at Windows , a Michelin - starred restaurant on the 28th floor of the London Hilton hotel on Park Lane .
On Christmas Day 2012 , Sirieix launched National Waiters Day to celebrate the work of front of house staff and attract people into the profession .
In 2011 , he launched The Art of Service - a board game for teaching customer service in hotels and restaurants .
Sirieix is also involved in charity work , creating a cocktail competition called the Galvin Cup , which awards young bartenders .
He also created the charity Galvin 's Chance , which supports underprivileged young front of house staff in London and Scotland 's best hotels , restaurants and bars .
In 2017 , Sirieix , along with Novus , launched the Right Course , which remodels prison staff restaurants to operate as high street restaurants to teach prisoners cooking and about other aspects of service industry .
TELEVISION Section::::Television .
Sirieix is the Maître d ' on Channel 4 's First Dates , deciding to be part of the show because " it sounded fun and you have to consider any opportunity .
I looked carefully at it and became sure it was a good programme at heart . "
He was also Maître d ' on the First Dates spin - off show , First Dates Abroad .
In addition to First Dates , Sirieix , along with celebrity chef Michel Roux Jr , co - hosted BBC Two 's Michel Roux 's Service .
In 2012 , he appeared on BBC One 's The Apprentice whilst the programme filmed at Galvin at Windows .
In 2017 , he appeared in Channel 4 's Tried and Tasted : The Ultimate Shopping List .
In 2018 , he presented Million Pound Menu , a new show for BBC Two .
In December 2017 , he appeared in ITV 's Gordon , Gino and Fred 's Great Christmas Roast , alongside Gordon Ramsay and Gino D'Acampo .
OTHER VENTURES
Section::::Other ventures .
In 2016 , Sirieix released a book called First Dates : The Art of Love .
In 2015 , Sirieix released a music track with Mark King from the band Level 42 and rapper XO MAN called La Vie Continue ( Life Goes On ) .
Sirieix describes it as " a song about love , loss and everything in between " .
AWARDS Section::::Awards .
In 2010 , Sirieix was nominated for the Cateys manager of the year award , winning it three years later in 2013 .
In October 2011 , he won the National Restaurant Awards ' Personality of the Year for his charity work and promoting the hospitality profession .
He was voted Educator of the Year in 2012 at the Imbibe awards and in March 2014 , he was awarded an honorary degree from the University of West London .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Sirieix enjoys keeping fit and is a keen runner and does thirty minutes of boxing in the afternoons , saying " I love boxing , I really love it – what a sport .
It 's got everything : it 's about the physical fitness , but also your mental fitness .
He cycles to work and says he completes 300 press - ups every day as soon as he wakes up .
Fred arranged a charity boxing match event in 2011 in which he fought chef Tom Haste ( now of The Lady Ottoline ) .
Fred was the clear favourite but was defeated by knockout .
Sirieix says he has " always had a very strong interest in the inner workings of the mind and how we can use it to visualise and create all sorts of possibilities for ourselves , " and has read many books in his " quest for wisdom " , with his favourite book being Meditations by Roman emperor Marcus Aurelius .
He lives in Peckham , south London .
During an interview for the Daily Mail in 2016 , Sirieix said that he was living with his former partner and their two children , but was in a new relationship .
In 2018 , Sirieix announced he was in a relationship , referring to his partner only as his ' fruitcake ' REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
La Vie Continue music track on YouTube
* Fred Sirieix at Biogs.com *
The Seven Sins of Fred Sirieix