GAME OF THRONES ( SEASON 8)
The eighth and final season of the fantasy drama television series Game of Thrones was announced by HBO in July 2016 .
Unlike the first six seasons that each had ten episodes and the seventh that had seven episodes , the eighth season will have only six episodes .
Like the previous season , it will largely consist of original content not found currently in George R. R. Martin 's A Song of Ice and Fire series and will also adapt material Martin has revealed to showrunners about the upcoming novels in the series , The Winds of Winter and A Dream of Spring .
The season will be adapted for television by David Benioff and D. B. Weiss .
Filming officially began on October 23 , 2017 , and concluded in July 2018 .
The season is scheduled to premiere in April 2019 .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
CAST MAIN CAST
* Peter Dinklage as Tyrion Lannister
* Nikolaj Coster - Waldau as Jaime Lannister
* Lena Headey as Cersei Lannister * Emilia Clarke as Daenerys Targaryen
* Kit Harington as Jon Snow * Liam Cunningham as Davos Seaworth * Sophie Turner as Sansa Stark
* Maisie Williams as Arya Stark
* Alfie Allen as Theon Greyjoy * Nathalie Emmanuel as Missandei * Gwendoline Christie as Brienne of Tarth
* John Bradley as Samwell Tarly
* Isaac Hempstead Wright as Bran Stark * Hannah Murray as Gilly * Rory McCann as Sandor " The Hound " Clegane * Iain Glen as Jorah Mormont * Conleth Hill as Varys
* Carice van Houten as Melisandre
* Jerome Flynn as Bronn
* Joe Dempsie as Gendry SUPPORTING CAST
* Richard Dormer as Beric Dondarrion * Ben Crompton as Eddison Tollett
* Hafþór Júlíus Björnsson as Gregor Clegane
*
Jacob Anderson as Grey Worm * Daniel Portman as Podrick Payne
* Rupert Vansittart as Yohn Royce * Marc Rissmann as Harry Strickland PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
The eighth and final season of the fantasy drama television series Game of Thrones was announced by HBO in July 2016 .
Like the previous season , it will largely consist of original content not found currently in George R. R. Martin 's A Song of Ice and Fire series ; it will instead adapt material Martin has revealed to showrunners about the upcoming novels in the series , The Winds of Winter and A Dream of Spring .
CREW Section::::Crew .
Series creators and executive producers David Benioff and D. B. Weiss will serve as showrunners for the eighth season .
The directors for the eighth season were announced in September 2017 .
Miguel Sapochnik , who previously directed " The Gift " and " Hardhome " on season 5 , as well as " Battle of the Bastards " and " The Winds of Winter " on season 6 will return as director .
He will divide up direction of the first five episodes with David Nutter , who had directed two episodes on seasons two , three and five , including " The Rains of Castamere " and " Mother 's Mercy " .
The final episode of the show will be directed by Benioff and Weiss , who have previously directed one episode each .
At the show 's South by Southwest panel on March 12 , 2017 , Benioff and Weiss announced the writers for the show to be Dave Hill ( episode 1 ) and Bryan Cogman ( episode 2 ) .
The showrunners will then divide up the screenplay for the remaining four episodes amongst themselves .
WRITING Section::::Writing .
Writing for the eighth season started with a 140-page outline .
Benioff said that the divvying up process and who should write what section became more difficult because " this would be the last time that we would be doing this " .
FILMING Section::::Filming .
In an interview with Entertainment Weekly , HBO programming president Casey Bloys stated that instead of the series finale being a feature film , the final season would be " six one - hour movies " on television .
He continued , " The show has proven that TV is every bit as impressive and in many cases more so , than film .
What they 're doing is monumental . "
Filming officially began on October 23 , 2017 , and concluded in July 2018 .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
Co - creators David Benioff and D. B. Weiss have said that the seventh and eighth season would likely consist of fewer episodes , stating that after season six , they were " down to our final 13 episodes after this season .
We 're heading into the final lap . "
Benioff and Weiss stated that they were unable to produce 10 episodes in the show 's usual 12 to 14-month time frame , as Weiss said , " It 's crossing out of a television schedule into more of a mid - range movie schedule .
" HBO confirmed in July 2016 , that the seventh season would consist of seven episodes , and would premiere later than usual in mid-2017 because of the later filming schedule .
Benioff and Weiss later confirmed that the eighth season will consist of six episodes , and is expected to premiere later than usual for the same reason .
Benioff and Weiss spoke about the end of the show , saying , " From the beginning we 've wanted to tell a 70-hour movie .
It will turn out to be a 73-hour movie , but it 's stayed relatively the same of having the beginning , middle and now we 're coming to the end .
It would have been really tough if we lost any core cast members along the way , I 'm very happy we 've kept everyone
and we get to finish it the way we want to .
" The season is scheduled to premiere in April 2019 .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Ramin Djawadi is set to return as the composer of the show for the eighth season .
RELEASE MARKETING
Section::::Release .
Section::::Marketing .
On December 6 , 2018 , HBO released the first official teaser trailer for the eighth season .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* – official US site * – official UK site * Game of Thrones – The Viewers Guide on HBO.com * Making Game of Thrones on HBO.com