XBOX GAME PASS Xbox Game Pass is a subscription service from Microsoft for use with its Xbox One games console .
Described as " Netflix for video games " , the Xbox Game Pass grants users access to a catalog of games from a range of publishers for a single monthly subscription price .
The service was launched on June 1 , 2017 while Xbox Live Gold subscribers received priority access on May 24 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
On February 28 , 2017 , Microsoft announced the debut of Xbox Game Pass and made a limited catalog of games available to select members of its Xbox Insider community for testing and feedback .
Later in the second quarter of 2017 , the service was opened up to players who subscribe to Xbox Live Gold , and then to the general user population .
An Xbox Live Gold subscription is not required for Xbox Game Pass , but it is required for any online multiplayer content the games in the catalog may contain .
As part of Microsoft 's E3 2017 press conference , Microsoft announced that selected Xbox titles would be made available through a new backwards - compatibility feature similar to that in place for Xbox 360 titles .
In a later interview , Phil Spencer stated that some of those games could make their way onto Game Pass , as well .
On January 23 , 2018 , Microsoft announced an expansion of Game Pass that would see first - party titles arrive on the catalog day - and - date with the retail release of the game .
Sea of Thieves was the first new title to appear on Game Pass on its retail launch date , March 20 , 2018 .
Crackdown 3 , State of Decay 2 and Forza Horizon 4 will also be added upon launch , although their launch dates were not announced at the time , and future releases in existing Microsoft franchises , such as Halo and Gears of War , will also be added upon their release .
Additionally , select ID@Xbox
titles are also added to the service on their release dates , the first being Robocraft Infinity .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
Xbox Game Pass is similar to Xbox One 's existing EA Access video game subscription and to the PlayStation Now service offered by rival Sony .
The subscription catalog contains more than 100 games at launch , with games being added to , and sometimes withdrawn from , the catalog from time to time .
Xbox Game Pass allows the player to download the full game to the console ; according to Head of Xbox Phil Spencer , this was done to give players " continuous , full - fidelity gameplay without having to worry about streaming , bandwidth or connectivity issues " .
Unlike EA Access , Xbox Game Pass offers games from a wide range of publishers , such as Namco , Capcom , WB Games , 2 K Games , SEGA , and first party games from Microsoft Studios .
Additionally , while Playstation Now has a rental option for its games in addition to a paid subscription option , Xbox Game Pass has no such option .
The catalog features select games for Xbox One as well as select Xbox 360 and Xbox titles with which Xbox One is backwards - compatible .
There is no limit to the number of games a player can download and install to their consoles , other than the amount of storage space available to the console .
As long as a game remains in the catalog , it is available for unlimited download and play by subscribers .
Players can purchase games in the catalog at a 20 % discount , and any related add - on content for those games at a 10 % discount .
The discounted price is available only while the game is in the catalog and is only for the particular game ; for comparison , the EA Access 10 % subscriber discount applies to any EA - published content , not just content in its subscription catalog .
Games from the catalog can be played while the console is offline , but for no more than 30 days before it must reconnect to verify an active subscription .
If the game is removed from the catalog by Microsoft , or the player ends their subscription , access is suspended until the player purchases the game or renews their subscription , but their in - game progress will be saved in the interim .
If the game is an Xbox 360 title , it will be back - compatible and must be used on Xbox One ; it can not be downloaded to a player 's Xbox 360 console unless the player chooses to purchase it .
AVAILABILITY Section::::Availability .
Argentina , Australia , Austria , Belgium , Brazil , Canada , Chile , Colombia , Czech Republic , Denmark , Finland , France , Germany , Greece , Hong Kong , Hungary , India , Ireland , Israel , Italy , Korea , Mexico , Netherlands , New Zealand , Norway , Poland , Portugal , Russia , Saudi Arabia , Singapore , Slovakia , South Africa , Spain , Sweden , Switzerland , Taiwan , Turkey , United Arab Emirates , UK , US .
SEE ALSO
* PlayStation Now REFERENCES