UNITED STATES TWO - DOLLAR BILL
The United States two - dollar bill ( $ 2 ) is a current denomination of U.S. currency .
The portrait of the third President of the United States ( 1801–09 ) , Thomas Jefferson , is featured on the obverse of the note .
The reverse features an engraving of the painting Declaration of Independence by John Trumbull .
Throughout the $ 2 bill 's pre-1929 life as a large - sized note , it was issued as a United States Note , National Bank Note , silver certificate , Treasury or " Coin " Note and Federal Reserve Bank Note .
When U.S. currency was changed to its current size , the $ 2 bill was issued only as a United States Note .
Production went on until 1966 , when the series was discontinued .
Ten years passed before the $ 2 bill was reissued as a Federal Reserve Note with a new reverse design .
Two - dollar bills are seldom seen in circulation as a result of banking policies with businesses which has resulted in low production numbers due to lack of demand .
This comparative scarcity in circulation , coupled with a lack of public knowledge that the bill is still in production and circulation , has also inspired urban legends about its authenticity and value and has occasionally created problems for those trying to use the bill to make purchases .
DENOMINATION OVERVIEW Section::::Denomination overview .
The denomination of two dollars was authorized under a congressional act , and first used in March 1862 .
The denomination was continuously used until the 1960s ; by this time the United States Note was the only remaining class of U.S. currency the two - dollar bill was assigned to .
In 1966 , the Treasury Department decided to discontinue production of all denominations of United States Notes , which included the two - dollar bill .
The two - dollar denomination was not immediately reassigned to the Federal Reserve Note class of United States currency and was thus fully discontinued ; the Treasury cited the two - dollar bill 's low use and unpopularity as the reason for not immediately resuming use of the denomination .
In 1976 , production of the two - dollar denomination was resumed and the two - dollar bill was finally assigned as a Federal Reserve Note , with a new reverse design featuring John Trumbull 's depiction of the drafting of the United States Declaration of Independence replacing the previous design of Monticello .
It has remained a current denomination since that time .
It was estimated that if the two - dollar bill replaced approximately half of the one - dollar bills in circulation , the federal government would be able to save about $ 26 million in 1976 dollars ( $ adjusted for inflation ) over the period from 1976 to 1981 , due to reduced production , storage , and shipping costs .
However , due to their limited use , two - dollar bills are not printed as frequently in a new series as other denominations , which are produced according to demand .
Some bill acceptors found in vending machines , self checkout lanes , transit systems and other automated kiosks are configured to accommodate two - dollar bills , even if the fact is not stated on the label .
Although they are generally available at most banks , two - dollar bills are usually not handed out except upon specific request by the customer , and may cause a delay with a trip to the vault .
RARITY Section::::Rarity .
Printing $ 2 bills is twice as cost - effective for the government as printing $ 1 bills , since they both cost the same amount ( about $ 0.05 ) to make , but the public has not circulated them as widely .
During the Great Depression , few Americans had enough money to require $ 2 bills .
In the middle of the 20th century , $ 2 bills were commonly used at strip clubs , for betting on horse racing , and for bribery when politicians wanted votes ( though this may be an urban legend ) and so acquired a negative reputation .
Many people mistakenly believe that the 1976 series note with its unusual reverse design was a special , limited issue , produced for the United States Bicentennial .
This , combined with the earlier discontinuation of the denomination , gave the impression these notes might be valuable as collector 's items , and contributed to hoarding .
The public at large continues to be unfamiliar with the notes because they are not widely circulated and are still frequently hoarded .
Today , there is a common misconception by the general public that the $ 2 bill is no longer being produced , though bills have been printed with series of 1976 , 1995 , 2003 , 2003A , 2009 , and 2013 .
A series changes when there is a redesign of the bill or changes in signatory ; Secretary of the Treasury or Treasurer of the United States .
The U.S. treasury reports that $ 1,549,052,714 worth of $ 2 bills were in circulation worldwide as of April 30 , 2007 .
Things such as unusual serial numbers ( example : A11111111A ) , and replacement notes designated by a star in the serial number can raise the collector value .
" Collectible " two - dollar bills have been made and sold by coin dealers and others in recent years merely by adding colors and special graphics to regular issue bills by using computer printers .
However , these bills are not authorized by the Bureau of Engraving and Printing ( BEP ) and are not worth anything more than face value on the collectors ' market .
Certain conventions and tourism / convention bureaus capitalize on the scarcity of $ 2 bills in circulation , encouraging convention attendees and tourists to spend $ 2 bills in order to illustrate to the host communities the economic impact that the conventions and tourism bring .
Sometimes known as " SpendTom " campaigns , the $ 2 bills linger in the community as a constant reminder .
Some campaigns encourage people to participate in a hunt for the bills in order to win prizes .
HISTORY LARGE - SIZED NOTES Section::::History .
Section::::Large - sized notes .
In March 1862 , the first $ 2 bill was issued as a Legal Tender Note ( United States Note ) with a portrait of Alexander Hamilton ; the portrait of Hamilton used was a profile view and is unlike the portrait used currently for the $ 10 bill .
By 1869 , the $ 2 United States Note was redesigned with the now - familiar portrait of Thomas Jefferson to the left and a vignette of the United States Capitol in the center of the obverse .
This note also featured green tinting on the top and left side of the obverse .
Although this note is technically a United States Note , appeared on it instead of .
The reverse was completely redesigned .
This series was again revised in 1874 ; changes on the obverse included removing the green tinting , adding a red floral design around , and changing the term to .
The 1874 design was also issued as Series of 1875 and 1878 , and by 1880 , the red floral design around on the United States Note was removed and the serial numbers were changed to blue .
This note with the red floral design was also issued as Series of 1917 but with red serial numbers by that time .
National Bank Notes were issued in 1875 and feature a woman unfurling a flag and a big 2 ( Lazy Duce ) on the obverse .
The reverse has the king of England smoking tobacco and an eagle with a shield .
In 1886 , the first $ 2 silver certificate with a portrait of United States Civil War General Winfield Scott Hancock on the left of the obverse was issued .
This design continued until 1891 when a new $ 2 Silver Certificate was issued with a portrait of U.S. Treasury Secretary William Windom in the center of the obverse .
Two - dollar Treasury , or " Coin " , Notes were first issued for government purchases of silver bullion in 1890 from the silver mining industry .
The reverse featured large wording of in the center and a numeral 2 to the right surrounded by an ornate design that occupied almost the entire note .
In 1891 , the reverse of the Series of 1890 Treasury Note was redesigned because the treasury felt that it was too " busy " , making it too easy to counterfeit .
More open space was incorporated into the new design .
In 1896 , the " Educational Series " Silver Certificate was issued .
The entire obverse of the note was covered in artwork with an allegorical figure of science presenting steam and electricity to commerce and manufacture .
The reverse of the note featured portraits of Robert Fulton and Samuel F. B. Morse surrounded by an ornate design that occupied almost the entire note .
By 1899 , however , The $ 2 Silver Certificate was redesigned with a small portrait of George Washington surrounded by allegorical figures representing agriculture and mechanics .
Large - sized Federal Reserve Bank Notes were issued in 1918 .
Each note was an obligation of the issuing Federal Reserve Bank and could only be redeemed at the corresponding bank .
The obverse of the note featured a borderless portrait of Thomas Jefferson to left and wording in the entire center .
The reverse featured a World War I battleship .
Beginning in the 1950s , production of $ 2 bills began to decrease .
The relative scarcity of the bills led some to start saving any they found , with the inevitable result that the notes became rarer in circulation .
Currently , the circulation of $ 2 bills accounts for around 1 % of the U.S. currency in circulation .
SMALL SIZE
NOTES 1928–1966 Section::::Small size notes .
Section::::1928–1966 .
In 1928 , when all U.S. currency was changed to its current size , the $ 2 bill was issued only as a United States Note .
The obverse featured a cropped version of Thomas Jefferson 's portrait that had been on previous $ 2 bills .
The reverse featured Jefferson 's home , Monticello .
The note 's seal and serial numbers were red .
The Series of 1928 $ 2 bill featured the treasury seal superimposed by the United States Note obligation to the left and a large gray to the right .
In 1953 , the $ 2 bill received minor design changes analogous to the $ 5 United States Note .
The treasury seal was made smaller and moved to the right side of the bill ; it was superimposed over the gray word .
The United States Note obligation now became superimposed over a gray numeral 2 .
The reverse remained unchanged .
The final change to $ 2 United States Notes came in 1963 when the motto was added to the reverse over the Monticello .
Further , because dollar bills were soon to be no longer redeemable in silver , was removed from the obverse .
All United States Notes of the $ 2 , $ 5 and $ 100 denominations were officially discontinued in August 1966 , although they all remain legal tender .
1976–PRESENT
Section::::1976–present .
On April 13 , 1976 , the Treasury Department reintroduced the $ 2 bill as a cost - saving measure .
Series 1976 $ 2 bills were redesigned and issued as a Federal Reserve Note .
The obverse design remains basically unchanged since 1928 and features the same portrait of Jefferson .
A green treasury seal and serial numbers replace the red used on the previous United States Notes .
Since the reissue of the bill coincided with the United States Bicentennial , it was decided to use a bicentennial - themed design on the reverse , though the bill was not issued specifically to celebrate the bicenntenial .
An engraved rendition ( not an exact reproduction ) of John Trumbull 's Declaration of Independence replaced Monticello on the reverse .
First - day issues of the new $ 2 bills could be taken to a post office and stamped with the date " APR 13 1976 " .
In all , 590,720,000 notes from Series 1976 were printed .
Currently , stamped series 1976 $ 2 bills typically trade for about twice their face value .
If the bills were stamped in a city with an unusual name , the value may be slightly higher .
However , no first - day - issued 1976 $ 2 bills with stamps are especially rare or valuable .
Despite their age , crisp , uncirculated series 1976 $ 2 bills are not uncommon and are not particularly valuable .
More than half a billion of these notes were printed and a large amount were saved and hoarded upon their original issue .
A typical single uncirculated 1976 $ 2 bill is worth only slightly above face value .
If the note is circulated , then it is only worth its $ 2 face value .
In 1996 and 1997 , 153,600,000 bills were printed as Series 1995 for the Federal Reserve District of Atlanta .
In 2004 , 121,600,000 of the Series 2003 bills were printed for the Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank .
An issue of Series 2003A $ 2 bills was printed from July to September 2006 for all twelve Federal Reserve Banks .
In all , 220,800,000 notes were printed .
In February 2012 , the B.E.P. printed 512,000 Series 2009 $ 2 Star Notes , in anticipation of more regular runs being printed later in 2012 .
Series 2009 $ 2 bills were issued to banks during the summer of 2012 .
In November 2013 , the B.E.P. began printing series 2013 $ 2 bills for the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta ; these notes entered circulation in early 2014 .
A total of 44,800,000 notes were ordered for fiscal year 2014 , which ran from October 2013 through September 2014 .
SERIES DATES LARGE SIZE
Section::::Series dates .
Section::::Large size . !
Type !
Series !
Register !
Treasurer !
Seal !
Notes
Silver Certificate 1891 William S. Rosecrans Benjamin Harrison Large Red Treasury Note 1890 William S. Rosecrans Benjamin Harrison Large Red SMALL SIZE
Section::::Small size . !
Type !
Series !
Treasurer !
Secretary !
Seal Federal Reserve Note
VISUAL SNAPSHOT Section::::Visual snapshot .
A chronological display of the American two - dollar bill .
USAGE Section::::Usage .
Over five million $ 2 bills are entered into the database of the American currency - tracking website Where 's George ? .
Because $ 2 bills are uncommon in daily use , their use can make a particular group of spenders visible .
A documented case of using two - dollar bills to send a message to a community is the case of Geneva Steel and the communities in the surrounding Utah County .
In 1989 , Geneva Steel paid its employee bonuses in $ 2 bills .
When the bills began to appear in different places , people recognized the importance of the company to the local economy .
Use of the two - dollar bill is also being suggested by some gun rights activists to show support for Second Amendment rights , particularly at stores that allow open carry or concealed carry of weapons on their premises .
Two - dollar notes have also seen increased usage in situations where tipping is encouraged , especially in gentlemen 's clubs .
This is due to the idea that tips will increase because of the ease of use of a single , higher - denomination bill as the lowest common note in use .
The use of the two - dollar bill is popular among fans and alumni of Clemson University , who often bring notes with them when traveling to university athletic events in other localities as a demonstration of their economic impact in an area .
The idea was first popularized in 1977 when Georgia Tech had threatened no longer to play the Tigers in football and has since caught on as a token of fandom when traveling to other locations .
Fans will often stamp an orange tiger paw ( Clemson 's logo ) on the note as a sign of its origin .
During the 1930s , the $ 2 bill was often used at East Coast horse race tracks to make a bet .
Because of the German and Jewish influence , the bill was locally known in parts of New Jersey as a " zwei - buck " , and the upper right corner " 2 " was sometimes torn off to increase the luck .
INCIDENTS Section::::Incidents .
The relative scarcity of the $ 2 bill in everyday circulation has led to confusion at points of sale , as well as overreaction and prosecution of the individual attempting to tender the bill .
In 2005 , a man in Baltimore , Maryland , was jailed for attempting to use $ 2 bills to pay a car stereo installation fee that Best Buy originally agreed to waive in the first place .
In 2016 , a 13-year - old girl in Texas was detained by police at Fort Bend Independent School District 's Christa McAuliffe Middle School and prevented from eating lunch that day for attempting to use a $ 2 bill to pay for chicken nuggets in the school cafeteria .
UNCUT CURRENCY SHEETS Section::::Uncut currency sheets .
Uncut currency sheets are available from the Bureau of Engraving and Printing .
Some of the recent $ 2 uncut sheets from Series 1995 and Series 2003 have been collectibles as they come from special non - circulation printings .
Most of the Series 1995 $ 2 uncut sheets had a higher suffix letter in the serial number than regular circulation $ 2 bills .
Uncut $ 2 sheets from Series 2003 were printed for the Boston ( A ) , New York ( B ) , Atlanta ( F ) , Chicago ( G ) , Minneapolis ( I ) , and Dallas ( K ) Federal Reserve districts despite the fact that notes from the Minneapolis district were the only ones released for circulation .
Uncut sheets of Series 2003A have also been produced , although in this case circulating currency for all districts has also been made .
All two - dollar bills beginning with Series 1995 have been printed in the BEP facility in Fort Worth , Texas , ( indicated by " FW " preceding the face plate number on the obverse of the note ) .
Uncut sheets of $ 2 bills are available in various sizes .
A 32-subject sheet , which is the original - size sheet on which the notes are printed , is available .
Other sheet sizes available have been cut from the original 32-subject sheet .
These include half ( sixteen - note ) , quarter ( eight - note ) , and eighth ( four - note ) sheets for $ 2 bills .
Uncut sheets are sold for more than their respective face values .
Uncut sheets of large size notes ( issued before 1928 ) also exist , but are extremely rare .
REFERENCES General * Standard Catalog of United States Paper Money , 17th edition published by Krause Publications " * The Bureau of Engraving and Printing website
*
USpapermoney.info EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The U.S. Bureau of Engraving and Printing 's website
* USAToday : " $ 2 bill increasing in use and shedding its ' play - money ' image " 2006 - 11 - 06 .
*
The Two Dollar Bill project teaches Americans about the history of the $ 2 bill