EVERMORE ( BEAUTY AND THE BEAST SONG )
" Evermore " is a song written by composer Alan Menken and lyricist Tim Rice for the musical fantasy film Beauty and the Beast ( 2017 ) , a live - action remake of Disney 's 1991 animated film of the same name .
Originally recorded for the film by English actor Dan Stevens , who performs the song in his starring role as the titular Beast , " Evermore " was first released as a single by American singer Josh Groban on March 3 , 2017 .
Stevens ' version became available on March 10 , 2017 when the film 's soundtrack was released online , while Groban 's cover is played during the film 's closing credits .
In the animated film , the Beast barely sings because Menken and original Beauty and the Beast lyricist Howard Ashman had not been able to determine a moment in the film during which it would have been appropriate for the character to perform his own song .
Initially , Menken had especially wanted the Beast to perform " If I Ca n't Love Her " , a song he and Rice had written for the character to sing in stage adaptation of the animated film , in the remake , but ultimately decided that an entirely new song that establishes that the Beast has finally learned how to love instead would be more suitable due to the film 's three - act structure .
" Evermore " is a somber Broadway - influenced power ballad ; its lyrics explore themes such as true love , heartbreak , loneliness and sacrifice .
In Beauty and the Beast , " Evermore " is performed by the Beast shortly after he releases Belle from the castle so that she may return to the village and aid her father .
Despite knowing that freeing her will further jeopardize his chances of becoming human again , the Beast realizes he loves Belle and ultimately sacrifices his own happiness in return for hers .
Critical reception towards " Evermore " has been mostly positive , with both film and music critics dubbing it the best of the remake 's original songs amidst comparisons to " If I Ca n't Love Her " .
Critics frequently recognized Stevens among the cast 's best vocalists and agreed that " Evermore " is a strong contender for an Academy Award for a Best Original Song nomination at the 90th Academy Awards , however it was not nominated for the category .
WRITING AND RECORDING Section::::Writing and recording .
Director Bill Condon originally intended to include most songs from the Broadway musical adaptation of Beauty and the Beast in the remake .
However , Disney ultimately decided to recruit composer Alan Menken and lyricist Tim Rice to write entirely new songs for the film instead .
Original Beauty and the Beast composer Menken reunited with Rice , with whom he had previously collaborated on Disney 's animated film Aladdin ( 1992 ) , to write three new songs for the remake .
Rice once again replaced original Beauty and the Beast lyricist Howard Ashman , who had passed away shortly before the animated film 's release in 1991 , similar to the way in which he replaced the lyricist to aid Menken in writing new material for the 1994 stage adaptation .
Menken believes that the songs he and Rice had written for the stage musical would not have translated well to the screen due to structural differences between the two formats .
In the original animated film , the Beast does little singing apart from a brief solo during " Something There " because Menken and Ashman had not been able to agree upon a suitable moment within the film during which the Beast could have performed his own song .
However , Menken considered it imperative that the character sing a solo in both the stage and live - action adaptations because he believes the Beast is actually the story 's protagonist " whose life has changed in the most dramatic way .
" In the stage production , the Beast performs the ballad " If I Ca n't Love Her " after he frightens Belle away from the castle , wondering if he will ever be able to love anyone since he struggles to love her .
Menken and Condon had deliberated whether or not the song should be re - used in the remake ; despite Menken 's strong attachment to " If I Ca n't Love Her " , the musical number was ultimately omitted because it had been written specifically to conclude the first act of a Broadway musical .
Screenwriter Stephen Chbosky had originally suggested that the character receive a new song to perform some time after he has saved Belle from the wolves .
Due to the remake 's three - act structure , Menken and Condon concluded that it would be best to replace " If I Ca n't Love Her " with a song that better depicts the Beast 's feelings for Belle after he has finally learned to love her and realizes she is no longer his prisoner , while accepting the grimm reality that releasing her would ultimately decrease his chances of becoming human again .
Rice , who co - wrote " If I Ca n't Love Her " with Menken , further convinced the composer to substitute " If I Ca n't Love Her " with a more appropriate song , joking , " it would be like writing ' Do n't Cry for Me Brazil ' , " referring to " Do n't Cry for Me Argentina " , a song he famously wrote for the stage musical Evita .
Originally entitled " For Evermore " , " Evermore " was written by composer Menken and lyricist Rice .
The last of the three original songs written for the remake , " Evermore " was completed considerably late into production after the filmmakers finally agreed that the Beast should perform his own .
Written in Spring 2015 in London , England , Menken quickly composed its melody before Rice contributed lyrics revolving around the Beast releasing Belle .
Actor Dan Stevens , who portrays the Beast and performs " Evermore " , had little singing experience prior to being cast in the film .
Before " Evermore " was written , Condon informed Stevens that he would be singing a new song in his role as Beast .
Having not sung professionally since childhood , Stevens was required to retrain his singing voice , the process of which he found challenging .
To prepare for the recording , Stevens received extensive vocal coaching from vocal coach Ann - Marie Speed in addition to working closely with Menken .
Stevens first recorded a " guide track " for " Evermore " before he and Menken revisited the track to modify specific lines and notes .
To make the actor sound more " beast - like " , sound engineers digitally modified Stevens ' voice , which Menken produced himself .
Auto - Tune was used to make Stevens ' voice sound lower and heavier .
Menken continued making minor changes to the song well into production .
On recording a new song , Stevens said , " the pressure 's sort of off — but it 's also on — because it does n't have to sound like it did before , but it should sound good enough to sit alongside the music that 's already pretty great . "
Stevens agreed that the song is " a big , romantic , soaring number " about the Beast lamenting " I 've fallen in love with her , and now she 's buggered off , woe is me " , while " If I Ca n't Love Her " is " How am I going to fall in love with her ? "
Replacing "
If I Ca n't Love Her " with " Evermore " helped make the songwriters eligible for an Academy Award nomination for Best Original Song .
CONTEXT AND USE IN BEAUTY AND THE BEAST Section::::Context and use in Beauty and the Beast .
One of at least nine significant ways in which the remake deviates from its source material , " Evermore " is among the film 's songs that emphasize the sadness and loneliness of both the Beast and Belle 's situations .
Occurring approximately two - thirds into the film , the song assumes a role that was originally occupied by the song "
If I Ca n't Love Her " in the Broadway musical , identified by Fred Hawson of ABS - CBN News as " a grand moving solo " during which the Beast sincerely expresses his undying feelings for Belle .
In Beauty and the Beast , " Evermore " appears as a solo performed by the Beast shortly before " The Mob Song " as the film approaches its dramatic climax .
After the Beast and Belle ( Emma Watson ) share a dance in the castle 's ballroom to Mrs. Potts ( Emma Thompson ) singing " Beauty and the Beast " , the couple has a conversation during which the Beast learns how much Belle actually misses her father , Maurice ( Kevin Kline ) .
Finally admitting that Belle is no longer his prisoner , the character sings " Evermore " shortly after he releases the heroine from the castle , insisting that she return to her village and protect Maurice from Gaston ( Luke Evans ) .
Believing that Belle has been lost to him forever , the Beast is heartbroken by the character 's departure and laments his misfortune by performing " Evermore " , accepting that releasing his former prisoner makes breaking the enchantress ' spell more difficult , even impossible .
Serving as a culmination of both the Beast 's personal and emotional journeys , Tracy Goldman of The Cornell Daily Sun observed that the song " adds more depth to the character " by " highlighting the changes he goes through throughout the movie . "
Similar to " If I Ca n't Love Her " , " Evermore " provides the Beast with " a stronger voice " .
The song occurs at a pivotal moment in the film during which the Beast bemoans his decision to free Belle , while uncovering both his inner pain and growth as a character as he voices " a sad sense of longing .
" For the first time , audiences learn exactly how the Beast feels when he allows Belle to rescue Maurice , summarizing his love for her .
In the musical sequence , the Beast continues to climb higher up the turret of his castle to watch Belle as she rides away on her horse and gradually disappears into the distance .
Staged in a way that resembles a live musical due to Stevens ' performance and its cinematography , the orchestra increases and swells as the anguished Beast continues to climb .
Menken explained that the character , singing " with a raw emotion " , watches Belle leave while thinking to himself "
I know what love is now , and it 's wonderful , even though I 'll never see her again " , and " Evermore " captures the Beast 's agony as he watches the woman he loves leave him .
Citing the song as an example of the film 's characters resorting to singing whenever they find that they are not able to speak , Condon described " Evermore " as one of the film 's " dramatic high points " , proving that the Beast has finally become " worthy of love " .
For the Beast , the song represents " an ode to his love for Belle and his unending , longing devotion as she rides away from him , possibly forever " , serving as " a profound meditation on his own isolation and heartache " .
According to Menken , the character is " basically singing about how he now knows what love is " .
The Beast is now shown to be capable of feeling and expressing human emotions , namely heartbreak , loneliness and helplessness , having learned about true love and sacrifice .
According to Zoe Nicholson of The Daily Gamecock , " Evermore " " adds humanity not yet seen in a character regarded as savage or spoiled rotten . "
Walt Disney Studios president of music and soundtracks Mitchell Leib described the scene as the film 's " Phantom of the Opera moment . "
Traditionally in Disney films , heroines are typically assigned " rousing " musical numbers to perform .
Screen Rant contributor Kacey Spivey observed that Belle 's departure and the scene represents a reversal of the traditional fairy tale trope in which a princess is trapped in a tower .
Instead the Beast is confined to his tower , longing for the heroine to return and free him from his enchantment .
Brett Nachman compared the scene to Quasimodo performing " Out There " in Disney 's animated musical The Hunchback of Notre Dame ( 1996 ) .
MUSIC AND LYRICS Section::::Music and lyrics .
Distinguished for being the remake 's " most powerful " original song , " Evermore " has been described as a " big " and " romantic " number by music critics .
A " soaring ballad " bolstered by " grand orchestration " , WTOP 's Jason Fraley described " Evermore " as a " haunting song of longing " ; a " mournful love song " that crescendos into a powerful lament about lost love .
An emotionally delivered power ballad , the Belfast Telegraph agreed that the ballad is " a soaring lament of longing " .
The accompaniment begins with the Beast 's " eerie " theme before transitioning into a solo , first emerging from the film 's " Rose " theme before taking on its central melody and instrumental bridge .
Despite being a miserable " lovesick ballad " , the somber tone of which Chris Knight of the National Post likened to songs from the musical Les Misérables , the ballad is a more upbeat offering than its Broadway counterpart , " If I Ca n't Love Her " , " captur[ing ] the elaborate aesthetic of musical theatre " .
However , the track remains one of the more melancholy inclusions on a soundtrack that consists of largely upbeat songs and musical numbers , contributing a sense of emotional depth to the album .
Writing for Elle , Alyssa Bailey dubbed the song a " Broadway version of a breakup ballad " , which features the lyrics "
I let her steal into my melancholy heart /
It 's more than I can bear , " as " swoon[ed ] " by Stevens .
Musically , the track bears similarities to songs from Disney 's animated film The Hunchback of Notre Dame ( 1996 ) , which Menken himself also composed , and it has been compared to the work of musical theatre composer Andrew Lloyd Webber .
" Evermore " 's lamenting melody is paired with lyrics that express loneliness , accompanied by heavy orchestration that swells and loudens as the ballad progresses .
Both " brooding " and hopeful at the same time , Jay Jason of Comicbook.com believes that the song 's lyrics are inspired by the popular saying " If you love someone , let them go .
" Stevens ' voice quavers with emotion when he sings the phrase " I never needed anybody in my life " .
Amanda Greever of The Daily Times insists that the song 's lyrics will move all listeners to tears .
Featuring lyrics that revolve around heartache and heartbreak , " Evermore " 's chorus reads : " Now I know she 'll never leave me / Even as she runs away /
She will still torment me
/ Call me , hurt me
/ Move me , come what may / Wasting in my lonely tower /
Waiting by an open door / I'll fool myself , she 'll walk right in / And be with me for evermore " , which Stevens performs vulnerably .
The track also discusses themes such as true love , sacrifice and learning to understand love .
Stevens sings within the vocal range of a " deep , resonating baritone " throughout the song , which lasts a total duration of three minutes and fourteen seconds ;
Channel NewsAsia contributor Genevieve Sarah Loh compared Stevens ' voice , whose notes are suspended by the instrumentation , to " melted - chocolate " , gradually becoming more human - sounding as the song progresses .
Belting comfortably , Stevens ' voice has been compared to that of Terrence Man , the actor who originated the role of the Beast in the Broadway adaptation and recorded " If I Ca n't Love Her " .
Mumbling slightly , Stevens begin the song using a more " guttural " part of his voice in an effort to impersonate the sound of a beast before the song truly progresses into " a soaring love ballad " .
Some traces of Auto - Tune can be heard in Stevens ' performance .
RELEASE AND RECEPTION Section::::Release and reception .
When Disney released the film 's first official trailer in November 2016 , Billboard 's Taylor Weatherby ranked " Evermore " fifth on the magazine 's ranking of " 6 Songs
We 're Most Excited to Hear " from the remake .
Stevens ' version of " Evermore " was released on March 10 , 2017 as a track on the Beauty and the Beast soundtrack .
Menken 's demo version of the song is included on deluxe editions of the album .
" Evermore " has garnered positive reviews from both film and music critics , becoming " a fan favorite " among the film 's new musical additions .
Vulture.com 's Sarah Caldwell commended the studio 's decision to have a new musical number immediately follow " Beauty and the Beast " , the song for which the film remains most famous .
Writing for Stuff.co.nz , James Croot appreciated " Evermore " for both enhancing the film and finally allowing the Beast an opportunity to sing on - screen .
Katlin Risen of The State Journal - Register agreed that the song is " a lovely addition to the story " .
Andrew Gaug of News - Press NOW called the musical number " a welcome addition " to the film .
Citing " Evermore " among the film 's musical highlights , the Christian Broadcasting Network reviewed the track as " a wonderful , heartbreaking ballad " .
Lindsay Bahr of the Associated Press reviewed " Evermore " as " a more fitting ballad " for the character than " If I Ca n't Love Her " , while Her Campus ' Justine Steiner described the tune as " infectious " .
Xposé 's Marese O'Sullivan claims to have " adored " the song upon hearing it .
Cameron Meier of Orlando Weekly lauded " Evermore " as the film 's dramatic highlight , which he nearly rewarded with a standing ovation , while Metro 's Sarah Deen dubbed it " an instant classic " .Writing for the British Film Institute , Kate Stables opined that " Evermore " remains " the only standout among the film 's forgettable trio of new songs . "
Critics agreed that Stevens performance of the song is a highlight of the film .
Praising Stevens for " blow[ing ] viewers out of the water " with his voice , the Yakima Herald - Republic 's Danielle Niemann hailed the piece as " a simply awe - inspiring piece of music " that " can send chills up viewers ' spines , causing them to lose focus on everything
but [ Stevens ] " .
Jason Fraley of WTOP agreed that Stevens ' performance " will give you chills " , crowning " Evermore " the " Best of " Beauty and the Beast 's original songs .
The Salt Lake Tribune film critic Sean P. Means wrote that the track " gives Stevens a nice moment to pour out the tragic hero 's broken heart . "
According to The Toronto Star 's Peter Howell , " Evermore " establishes Stevens among " the [ cast 's ] best singers " , while La Presse 's Sonia Sarfati was moved by the actor 's interpretation .
Varsity contributor Robert Crawford appreciated Stevens for " add[ing ] a welcome , spine - tingling melancholy moment to an otherwise joyous score . "
CIHR - FM 's Shelby Knox concluded that , despite the actor 's limited singing experience , Stevens " shows a lot of promise " , dubbing his song the film 's " stand out " .
Meanwhile , MTV included the song at number four on their ranking of " All 14 Songs from Disney 's Live - action Beauty and the Beast " ; author Crystal Bell claims that she would have ranked " Evermore " higher if Stevens ' voice had n't been manipulated to sound deeper than it is .
Bell went on to write that the song sounds like " a B side off The Hunchback of Notre Dame " , which she insists is " the highest compliment I can give a song . "
Dismissing the song as inferior to " If I Ca n't Love Her " , ReelViews film critic James Berardinelli described " Evermore " as a " solid " but ultimately unmemorable song .
However , Berardinelli agreed that Stevens possesses the " best voice " in the cast , wishing his character " had more opportunities to use it " .
Angie Han of Mashable admitted that the song " fares a little better " than " How Does a Moment Last Forever " and " Days in the Sun " , but ultimately accused it of slowing the film down unnecessarily .
Maria Sciullo of the Pittsburgh Post - Gazette felt that the ballad " lacks the sheer power of ' If I Ca n't Love Her ' " in addition to finding Stevens ' performance difficult to evaluate due to his use of Auto - Tune .
Zimbio contributor Lani Conway reviewed Stevens ' " very deep voice " as " confusing as hell .
"
IGN 's Eric Goldman was unimpressed with the track , reviewing " Evermore " as " uninspired and hard to recall " afterward .
Criticizing the ballad for being unnecessary and " excessively sentimental " , Alexandra August of Comic Book Resources dismissed " Evermore " as a " meandering " and " mopey " tune .
The Rolla Daily News critic Dana Barbuto felt that the song is " less soaring than intended " , while Katie Walsh , writing for The Sun Chronicle , disparaged " Evermore " as " the perfect bathroom break " ; a " snooze - worthy tune does nothing for the already dragging story " , encouraging audience members to skip it .
In a mixed review , the Daily Bruin 's Matthew Fernandez , despite describing " Evermore " as one of two songs " that matchesthe grandeur of the classic Disney works " , criticized Steven 's performance , which he called " less pleasing to the ear " due to Stevens ' impersonation of a beast during early parts of the song , dismissing the attempt " cheesy " and harmful to the actor 's performance .. Fred Hawson of ABS - CBN News said " Evermore " was a strong contender for an Academy Award for Best Original Song nomination .
The Hollywood Reporter 's Scott Feinberg said that " Evermore " is the " strongest " prospective Best Original Song nominee from the film , while Paul Sheehan of Golderby said that the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences would most likely favor " Evermore " over " How Does a Moment Last Forever " and " Days in the Sun " .
In December 2017 , the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences revealed that " Evermore " was one among 70 songs that the organization shortlisted for Best Original Song consideration .
Ultimately , " Evermore " did not earn a nomination in the category ( nor did any other original composition from the remake ) , which some critics have viewed as a snub given the popularity of the song and the film .
CHART PERFORMANCE Section::::Chart performance .
Although Stevens ' version of the song was never released as a single , its popularity combined with that of the film and its related soundtrack resulted in the track charting on several charts due to digital download sales .
" Evermore " peaked at number 18 and 46 on the US Billboard
Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles and US Digital Songs charts , respectively , on April 8 , 2017 , spending one week on both charts .
!
scope="col
" Chart ( 2017 ) ! scope="col " Peak position JOSH GROBAN VERSION Section::::Josh Groban version .
Following the release of Ariana Grande and John Legend 's pop rendition of " Beauty and the Beast " , Leib asked the studio for permission to release another one of Beauty and the Beast 's original songs as a single ahead of the film 's March 17 , 2017 release date .
After eliminating " Days in the Sun " and confirming that Canadian singer Celine Dion would not be available to promote her cover of " How Does a Moment Last Forever " , the studio ultimately decided to release " Evermore " .
Menken and Condon had been discussing which contemporary recording artist would be capable of delivering a song as vocally " demanding " as " Evermore " .
After briefly considering Italian opera singer Andrea Bocelli , Leib suggested American singer Josh Groban because , in his opinion , the singer 's " voice is a natural fit for this showstopper of a composition . "
Having already known Groban personally , Menken texted the singer who immediately confirmed his interest .
Groban recorded the song shortly after the studio made final arrangements with his manager .
On January 26 , 2017 , Disney announced that Groban had recorded a cover of " Evermore " – still entitled " For Evermore " , at the time – and revealed that his version would be included on the remake 's soundtrack in addition to being played during the film 's end credits .
Groban released a statement , saying : " I am honored to sing this beautiful new song by two of my absolute favorites , Alan Menken and Tim Rice .
Beauty and the Beast has been with me since my childhood and to have a musical connection to this new film makes me so happy .
"
The announcement coincided with the studio 's release of a new promotional poster for the film , which Disney allowed the singer to premiere using his official Twitter account .
A 30-second sample of the track was uploaded to SoundCloud on February 14 , 2017 , which Groban also shared on Twitter .
Groban 's version was released as the second single from Beauty and the Beast 's soundtrack on March 3 , 2017 , several days before the album , on which Stevens ' original rendition appears , was released .
Groban promoted the song with a performance on Good Morning America on March 14 , 2017 .
The occasion marked both the song 's first televised performance , as well as the first time an original song from the remake was performed live on television .
Musically , Groban 's single remains a " Broadway - like " operatic pop ballad that features the same lyrics , beginning " I was the one who had it all " .
Written in the key of A major at moderately slow tempo of 96 beats per minute , Groban 's three - minutes - and - nine - seconds rendition evokes a " sweeping , operatic quality " , featuring lyrics revolving about pining for true love .
At the same time , the single resembles contemporary Disney ballads such as Sarah McLachlan 's " When She Loved Me " and Phil Collins ' " You 'll Be In My Heart " from the animated films Toy Story 2 and Tarzan , both of which were released in 1999 , respectively .
According to Golderby 's Paul Sheehan , the track is Groban 's " heartbreaking rendition of " a " plaintive plea for love .
" The song garnered positive reviews from critics that distinguished it from the mild controversies that had been surrounding the film at the time of its release .
Devan Coggan of Entertainment Weekly described the song as a " gorgeous ballad " , while Den of Geek praised Groban 's interpretation as " immeasurable " .
According to Elle writer Alyssa Bailey , Groban 's emotional performance will cause listeners to " feel the Beast 's feels " .
Dubbing the track " one of the highlights of the album " , the Daily Bruin 's Matthew Fernandez reviewed the ballad as " a grand uplifting ballad centered on Groban 's rich voice " .
Vulture.com 's Sarah Caldwell admitted to listening to both Groban and Stevens ' versions of the song back - to - back with " zero ounces of shame . "
34th Street Magazine contributor Haley Weiss preferred Groban 's version to Stevens ' original , calling it " breathtaking and downright lovely to listen to " while dismissing the film version as " downright mediocre in comparison . "
Weiss questioned why Disney had n't cast Groban as the Beast instead of Stevens due to the former 's acting and musical theatre background .
REFERENCES