THE END OF THE F***ING WORLD
The End of the F***ing World is a British dark comedy - drama television programme , based on a graphic novel of the same name by Charles Forsman .
The eight - part programme premiered its first episode on Channel 4 in the United Kingdom on 24 October 2017 , after which all eight episodes were released on All 4 .
It was a co - production with Netflix , who released it internationally on 5 January 2018 .
The programme follows James ( Alex Lawther ) , a 17-year - old who believes himself to be a psychopath , and Alyssa ( Jessica Barden ) , a rebellious classmate who sees in James a chance to escape from her tumultuous home life .
The show is based on Forsman 's mini - comics
The End of the Fucking World , which were collected into a book in 2013 .
Series creator Jonathan Entwistle contacted him about making a film , and a short was made in 2014 .
Instead , an eight - part serial was commissioned , with filming beginning in April 2017 .
It was written by Charlie Covell , and episodes were directed by Entwistle and Lucy Tcherniak .
In August 2018 , Channel 4 renewed the programme for a second series .
The programme has been met with critical acclaim , and has been praised for its writing , execution and subject matter , as well as for Lawther and Barden 's performances .
It was nominated for the 2018 British Academy Television Award for Best Drama Series .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
James is a 17-year - old who believes he is a psychopath .
He kills animals as a hobby , but grows bored of the practice .
He decides he wants to try killing a human .
He settles on Alyssa , a mouthy , rebellious 17-year - old classmate with issues of her own .
She proposes they run away together , hoping for an adventure away from her turbulent home - life , and James agrees with the intention of finding an opportunity to kill her .
They embark on a road trip across England , and begin to develop a relationship after a series of mishaps .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* Alex Lawther as James , a 17-year - old who believes he is a psychopath ; the disturbed love interest of Alyssa .
Jack Veal portrays a young James .
* Jessica Barden as Alyssa , a rebellious teenage girl .
Initially James ' intended victim but later his love interest .
Holly Beechey portrays a young Alyssa .
* Gemma Whelan as DC Eunice Noon , Darego 's police partner .
* Wunmi Mosaku as DC Teri Darego , Noon 's stern police partner .
* Steve Oram as Phil , James ' caring father .
* Christine Bottomley as Gwen , Alyssa 's mother .
* Navin Chowdhry as Tony , Alyssa 's abusive stepfather .
* Barry Ward as Leslie Foley , Alyssa 's estranged drug - dealing father .
GUEST
* Kierston Wareing as Debbie , Leslie 's ex - girlfriend with whom he has a child .
* Geoff Bell as Martin , a family man and creep who gives Alyssa and James a ride .
* Alex Sawyer as Topher , a young man
Alyssa meets and attempts to engage in sexual activity with .
* Jonathan Aris as Dr. Clive Koch , an author , professor , serial killer and James ' first human victim .
* Eileen Davies as Flora , Clive 's mother .
* Earl Cave as Frodo , a miserable petrol station employee .
* Felicity Montagu as the manager of the petrol station .
* Alex Beckett as Jonno , one of Leslie 's buyers .
* Leon Annor as Emil , an imposing store security guard whom Alyssa is caught by .
* Matt King as DC Eddie Onslow .
* Kelly Harrison as James ' dead mother .
* Zerina Imsirovic as Alyssa 's baby sister .
EPISODES
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
The series was based on the work of the same name by Charles Forsman .
Originally self - published as a series of mini - comics , the series was published as a graphic novel by Fantagraphics Books in 2013 .
It was republished in hardback in 2017 , in anticipation of the television series .
While Forsman was publishing the mini - comics , Jonathan Entwistle contacted him about adapting it to a visual format –
the original idea was to make an American film , and later a web series was considered .
A film was pitched to Film4 , and Entwistle was given funding for a short .
Made in 2014 , it featured some cast and crew who continued their roles for the television series .
Entwistle directed and Dominic Buchanan was producer ; Jessica Barden played Alyssa .
However , instead of Alex Lawther , James was played by Craig Roberts .
Though the short was well - received , no production companies wanted to invest in the idea as a full - length film .
Entwistle and Buchanan decided to make a television series with Clerkenwell Films , following which Channel 4 and then Netflix became involved .
Forsman had no official role in the show 's production , wanting to continue working on his comics , though Entwistle would regularly consult him and keep him updated .
In August 2018 , Channel 4 's director of programmes Ian Katz expressed frustration that many people think the programme is a Netflix original , saying that " it 's absolutely a Channel 4 show " .
The programme 's plot differs from that of Forsman 's comics .
In print , the two kill a satanist serial killer , whose wife was a police officer ;
instead the television series features police officers Eunice Noon and Teri Darego , and does not show the serial killer to be a satanist .
Another major difference is the ending of the graphic novel : the satanist police officer chases after James , and the two begin to attack each other , while police try to break up the fight .
There is then a gunshot .
In the final scene , Alyssa 's mother talks about her daughter being safe from James , while Alyssa is seen carving the name " JAMES " into her arm .
Some critics interpreted this to mean that James was dead , but Forsman sees the ending as ambiguous .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
The first series began filming in April 2017 and concluded a few weeks before the show 's release in October 2017 .
Though filmed in England , the programme has an American tone to it ; Entwistle was inspired by Twin Peaks and Fargo .
Episodes were filmed largely in suburban areas and across Surrey , with locations such as Woking , Bracknell and Longcross Studios .
Another filming location was Leysdown - on - Sea on the Isle of Sheppey .
Entwistle uses mostly close - up shots , particularly in early episodes where most frames feature only one character .
He uses this for deadpan humour , by moving from face to face to get shots of characters ' reactions .
The series is set in the present day , but Entwistle aimed to make it feel like it could have been set " any time from 1988 to 2006 " .
Additionally , diners have a 1970s - style design , and the soundtrack features songs from the 1950s , 60s and 70s , along with original music from Graham Coxon , the founding member of Blur .
Entwistle describes Coxon 's scores as " guitar - based suburban noir " , and notes that more of his music is used in later episodes for the police officers .
CONTINUATION Section::::Continuation .
The first series covered the entirety of the storyline in Forsman 's original comics .
On 25 January 2018 , Jonathan Entwistle spoke of the potential for a second series .
He confirmed that " We 're exploring and we 're seeing what we can do to expand the world and see where we get to . "
Entwistle then went on to say that Netflix was enthusiastic about a second series of the show if one could be conceived .
Writer Charlie Covell said " I think there are a number of stories we could tell " and that she would " love to write more " .
Actor Alex Lawther stated in an interview that he would be " very excited " for a second series , as it would give Covell " a chance to explore something from her imagination " .
A second series was announced on 21 August 2018 on the official Channel 4 Twitter account .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The eight - part programme premiered its first episode on Channel 4 in the United Kingdom on 24 October 2017 , after which all eight episodes were released on All 4 .
The End of the F***ing World was a co - production with Netflix who exclusively released it internationally on 5 January 2018 .
On that weekend , sales of the graphic novel rose considerably , with Fantagraphics Books selling out of the current print run according to Forsman .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The End of the F***ing World currently holds an approval rating of 98 % on review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes based on 44 reviews , with an average rating of 8.21/10 .
The site 's consensus states , " Misanthropy and humor blend perfectly in this romantically nihilistic show that proves that falling in love can feel like The End of the F***ing World . "
Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned a score of 81 out of 100 , based on 12 critics , indicating " universal acclaim " .
Reviewer Daniel Fienberg of The Hollywood Reporter lauded the programme 's writing , characters , and soundtrack , as well as praising the performances of Alex Lawther and Jessica Barden , calling it a " pitch - black , eight - episode comedy gem of a UK import " .
Kelly Lawler of USA Today called it " batty fun " , also praising Lawther and Barden 's performances while praising the programme 's surreal concept and execution .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
width="3 % "
Year !
width="24 % " Award !
width="45
% " Category !
width="6 % "
Result ! scope="col " class="unsortable " width="3 % " REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS