SECOND WIVES CLUB
Second Wives Club is an American reality television series that premiered on the E ! Network on May 4 , 2017 .
The show documents the personal and professional lives of a group of several women who are or to become the second or third fourth or fifth wives , to wealthy and successful men .
CAST
* Shiva Safai - fiancée to Mohamed Hadid .
* Veronika Obeng - Wife to Michael Obeng .
* Morisa Surrey - Wife to Mark W. Surrey .
* Shawna Craig - The fifth wife to Lorenzo Lamas .
* Katie Cazorla - fiancée to Walter Afanasieff .
* Tania Mehra - Wife to Dean Bornstein .
GUEST APPEARANCES
* Eli Hammond - Himself , ( a Certified Family Law Specialist , from Claery & Hammond , LLP . )
Note :
Attorney Hammond appeared as a guest on Second Wives Club , Season one , Episode 8 , " Game Over " .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The show was announced and production began in 2015 .
Since then , it has undergone name changes but is now officially called Second Wives Club .
The trailer was released in April 2017 .
The show premiered on May 4 , 2017 .
On October 5 , 2017 it was announced the show had ended after one season .
A fan asked cast member Katie Cazorla on Twitter if there would be a second season
and she stated that " I think E ! is going in a different direction .
So we 're not coming back .
It sucks because we rated well in the end and have awesome fans . "
EPISODES
LAWSUIT Section::::Lawsuit .
Michael Obeng says his wife Veronika Obeng agreed to do the series which originally was called Second Wives Club in 2015 .
Michael agreed to participate in the show in hopes to promote his business , and because he thought it would spotlight their happy marriage .
Veronika officially filed for divorce in 2016 .
Michael filed a lawsuit against the network in January 2016 .
The lawsuit states " The series was nothing about the couple 's happy marriage . "
Obeng claimed that he was required to display an " unrealistic and manufactured personality " which could harm his business if the show is allowed to air .
In a letter from his lawyer which was sent to E !
Entertainment in August 2016
, Obeng demanded that his children not to be included in the show .
The letter identified the show under a new name Famously Married .
Obeng is suing NBCUniversal the parent company of the E ! Network .
The suit seeks an injunction barring the network from airing or promoting the episode in which Obeng appears .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS