LEGION ( SEASON 2 )
The second season of the American cable television series Legion is based on the Marvel Comics character David Haller / Legion , a mutant diagnosed with schizophrenia at a young age .
The season is connected to the X - Men film series , and is produced by FX Productions in association with Marvel Television .
Noah Hawley serves as showrunner .
Dan Stevens stars as Haller , with Rachel Keller , Aubrey Plaza , Bill Irwin , Jeremie Harris , Amber Midthunder and Jean Smart also returning from the first season to star .
They are joined by Jemaine Clement and Hamish Linklater , promoted from guest roles in the first season , and Navid Negahban .
A second season of Legion was ordered by FX in March 2017 , with filming for the season relocating from Vancouver to California , to take advantage of tax incentives .
Production began in September 2017 , with practical effects again a priority for the series ' crew .
The season features the parasitic villain Amahl Farouk / Shadow King , portrayed by Negahban , searching for his original body after being forced out of Haller 's mind at the end of the first season .
The season premiered in Los Angeles on April 2 , 2018 , before its FX debut on April 3 .
It ran for 11 episodes , concluding on June 12 .
The series was renewed for a third season on June 1 .
EPISODES Section::::Episodes .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* Dan Stevens as David Haller
* Rachel Keller as Sydney " Syd " Barrett * Aubrey Plaza as Lenny Busker * Bill Irwin as Cary Loudermilk * Navid Negahban as Amahl Farouk / Shadow King * Jemaine Clement as Oliver Bird * Jeremie Harris as Ptonomy Wallace * Amber Midthunder as Kerry Loudermilk * Hamish Linklater as Clark Debussy * Jean Smart as Melanie Bird RECURRING
* Marc Oka as Admiral Fukyama
* Jon Hamm as the Narrator
* Nathan Hurd as the Monk * Katie Aselton as Amy Haller
* The Vermillion : *
Jelly Howie
* Brittney Parker Rose
* Lexa Gluck NOTABLE
GUESTS
* Quinton Boisclair as the Devil with the Yellow Eyes
* David Selby as Brubaker * Lily Rabe as Joan Barrett
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
In June 2016 , FX President John Landgraf said that Legion , if successful , could run for as many seasons as Hawley feels it needs to tell the story .
In January 2017 , Hawley said he was open to continuing the story past the first season , but did n't want the audience to get to the end of the first run and have " no resolution of any kind at the end of it . "
Star Dan Stevens said , " I know for a fact that there are more issues that David has to deal with than the one that we really address in the first season . "
FX renewed Legion for a second season on March 15 , 2017 .
At the end of that month , Hawley explained that he planned for the season to have ten episodes , and to focus more on the series ' other characters in addition to David Haller .
He added , " I do tend to think that that 's important , that even though the show is n't an anthology like Fargo , each season has a self - contained - ness to it , an identity to it .
But I think it 's a little too early to talk about what that identity might be .
" The season order was later expanded to eleven episodes , as announced by FX in May. WRITING Section::::Writing .
Hawley noted that the first season was about Haller 's internal struggle against the Shadow King , and that the latter 's transference to the character Oliver Bird at the end of the season signified a change to an external struggle for Haller that this season would explore .
Hawley wanted to avoid having a villain - of - the - year structure , with the second season introducing a new antagonist , instead wanting to continue the story surrounding the Shadow King from his introduction in the first season that " makes for a potential showdown that we 're really invested in as an audience " .
Hawley added that with the Shadow King reveal at the end of the first season , Haller can now blame " every bad thing he 's ever done on the entity that 's now gone , and now is thinking , ' I 'm just a purely good person ' ...
there 's sort of a hubris to that . "
Stevens said that " we have n't even really scratched the surface of the number of characters or entities that are contained within [ Haller ] .
The Shadow King was obviously one of them , and a large part , but there 's a lot more going on . "
Hawley did not have a plan for the second season when he ended the first on a cliffhanger , and enjoyed the challenge of developing the story from that point , noting that this was the first " true " second season he has created .
Hawley did not have to repeat this at the end of the second season , as he had a plan for future seasons by that point .
The second season begins a year after the end of the first , with Hawley feeling the time jump allowed them to " muddy the waters " rather than be " all clarity all the time " , since " that 's the fun of the show , the mystery of trying to figure things out . "
Stevens added that " everybody 's going to be playing catchup " , including the audience and Haller .
Hawley also said that the season would explore the world of heroes and villains , and that it was not yet decided which direction Haller would go .
The season spends more time inside the minds of the characters and in the Astral Plane than the first , and also explores " more specific genres and storytelling moments " to both be more ambitious than the first season and not repeat what had been done before ; Hawley wanted to " use the genre to solve the characters ... to explore the characters and stories that you could n't in a straight drama " .
The main story of the season focuses on Farouk searching for his original body , since mutant abilities are genetic and being reunited with the body will make him even more powerful .
The season includes some episodes that Hawley considered " more stand - alone " , that are still relevant to the plot of the season but were less interested in the plot and more character - focused .
This was something Hawley had not been comfortable doing during the first season due to introducing the " different than everything else"-series to audiences then .
To avoid the season becoming " a good versus evil or white hat versus black hat situation " , Hawley wanted to focus on thematic ideas such as " our shared reality being a choice that we make .
Sometimes societies go a little bit crazy .
How does that happen ? "
To help explore that idea , Hawley created an " educational segment " which he soon decided to add to each episode of the season .
The segments are narrated , and are intended to " take these concepts of mental illness , and visualizing them in a way where you can tell a story . "
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Returning from the first season to star are Stevens as David Haller , Rachel Keller as Sydney " Syd " Barrett , Aubrey Plaza as Lenny Busker , Bill Irwin as Cary Loudermilk , Jeremie Harris as Ptonomy Wallace , Amber Midthunder as Kerry Loudermilk , and Jean Smart as Melanie Bird .
Hawley considered Barrett to be the co - protagonist of the season alongside Haller , calling it a " two - hander " , with the season further exploring their relationship and comparing it to that of Melanie Bird and her husband Oliver .
Hamish Linklater joins the main cast , having portrayed Clark Debussy in a guest role in the first season .
With the end of the first season establishing the importance of Jemaine Clement 's character Oliver Bird , now the host of the villainous Shadow King , Hawley said that he had talked to the actor about the next season , and that he was " excited to come back " .
Clement 's return was confirmed in July 2017 , also being promoted to the main cast , along with the announcement that Saïd Taghmaoui had been cast as the true form of the Shadow King / Amahl Farouk .
In November , during production on the season , Taghmaoui announced that he was no longer involved with the series , and FX confirmed that " a decision was made to recast " the role of Farouk .
Navid Negahban was revealed to have taken over the role in January 2018 .
Hawley explained that Taghmaoui had not been " a great fit " , leading to the recast .
Negahban joins the main cast as well .
Jon Hamm narrates the educational segments throughout the season .
Hawley did not want the narration to feel " tainted " by having one of the series ' characters give their own point of view , and wanted an actor who could give " a sense of identity and a feeling of control [ as if ]
the show itself has a point of view and it 's all going somewhere " .
He compared the voice that he wanted for the narration to Alec Baldwin 's from the film The Royal Tenenbaums , and considered Hamm — who he thought had " a great voice"—after working with him on the film Pale Blue Dot .
Hamm agreed to take on the role , and Hawley thought he gave the segments " such character " , comparing the final performance to Rod Serling .
Hawley added that he was " pretty confident " the actor would only be providing his voice to the series rather than ever appearing onscreen .
Quinton Boisclair was confirmed to be returning as the Devil with the Yellow Eyes in July 2017 .
Katie Aselton also returns from the first season in a guest role as David 's sister Amy , before her body is infused with Busker 's DNA allowing that character to return to life .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
The season moves Haller 's hair closer to its unique look from the comics , with Stevens saying " it creeps ever higher " .
To create the sound of teeth chattering , for the people afflicted with the Catalyst mental virus , Hawley allowed sound supervisor Nick Forshager experiment with different approaches .
Simply recording the actors on set chattering their teeth " did n't have that biting sound that we really needed " , so they experimented with alternative sounds like horse hooves .
They ultimately found that any sound they produced close to teeth chattering came across as fake teeth , so they tried recording the teeth of the sound department 's staff in different ways .
The final version used in the series was recorded with a Neumann condenser microphone and then digitally manipulated to give it a " kind of eerie multilevel sound " .
Production designer Michael Wylie worked to continue the " all time " setting of the series in the second season , taking inspiration from styles and architecture across decades so as not to make the show appear as if it takes place in a specific time or place .
Because much of the season takes place in Division 3 headquarters , Wylie wanted to clearly distinguish the sets from those used for Summerland in the first season by changing a recurring motif : circles were used a lot throughout the designs of the first season , and hexagons are throughout the season two sets .
He thought this added some " familiarity " to the sets and made things " easier to design , and we also know that whenever you see a hexagon that you know you are in Division 3 without anyone having to tell you " .
Because of the tendency for a government facility to become " unbearably sterile " , Wylie looked to add depth to the sets with custom - made wall paper and complicated floor designs which did not go so far as to make the spaces feel personalized .
The robot - like Vermillion that Division 3 leader Admiral Fukyama communicates through have feminine physiques and mustaches .
They went through several variations , with Hawley wanting their look to be based on Dennis Franz .
The set in which the Admiral and the Vermillion are introduced was initially going to look like a larger version of the wicker basket that Fukyama wears .
The Division 3 dining hall is based on Hawley 's idea of a " sushi - go - round " restaurant but with the food on boats floating in water , with Wylie 's final design labelled a " 1970s Italian waterpark version " .
The water for the boats zig - zags through the set , causing issues for the crew trying to maneuver around the room .
Also built was Cary Loudermilk 's " lair " , the series ' take on a traditional superhero lab , which includes an " amplification chamber " that is an homage to the machine Cerebro that appears in the comics and films .
It is based on research into isolation tanks rather than any designs originating in the comics to prevent the series from simply copying what came before .
FILMING Section::::Filming .
For the season , Hawley looked to move production of the show from Vancouver to California to better accommodate his busy schedule .
This was made possible when the show was awarded over $ 11 million in tax incentives by the California Film Commission under its " Program 2.0 " initiative .
Hawley called this change of locale " another way that we helped the show not settle into a sort of familiar routine of standing sets and that sort of overly familiar sense of
it 's the same thing , week in and week out . "
He added , " I 'm going to try and look at southern California in a way that we have n't looked at before , to try and find a way to tell stories that are urban and rural and in the astral plane as it were , and continue to look like nothing else . "
Filming began on September 28 , 2017 .
The opening sequence of the season was filmed in the backyard of a Hollywood Hills home , in the sun , clearly establishing the different setting from the overcast locations of the first season .
As with the first season , Hawley was committed to emphasizing practical effects when creating the season 's visuals .
This included creating physical title cards to be filmed rather than digitally adding lettering .
Hawley also wanted to explore alternative representations of the usual elements found in superhero series , such as depicting a fight sequence as a dance battle , explaining , " A fight is a very black and white , two - dimensional thing .
We 're fighting and I 'm trying to beat you
and you 're trying to beat me .
But what if the scene is ...
part of it is peacocking and part of it is a courtship dance and part of it is fighting because ' I hate that I have to work with you ' etc .
You ca n't express that in a fight sequence , but in a dance fight you can .
" Negahban joined the series during production on the eighth episode following the recasting of the Shadow King , and had to reshoot all of the scenes from the first seven episodes featuring the character .
Filming for the season took place in a desert .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Composer Jeff Russo stated in April 2017 that he would begin work on the season , including developing new thematic material , in June after he completed work on the third season of Fargo .
SHARED UNIVERSE CONNECTIONS Section::::Shared universe connections .
For the second season , Hawley wanted to further explore the connections between the series and the wider X - Men universe , particularly in paralleling common elements found throughout the universe such as the " gray approach to morality and how characters can cross that line , like Magneto .
" This was something Hawley felt was unique to this universe , and " not the same kinda black and white universe that you get in other comic franchises , and so I really wanted to play with that .
" The season also continues to explore Haller 's father , Charles Xavier , though Hawley was reluctant to confirm an appearance by one of the X - Men film actors ( Patrick Stewart or James McAvoy ) reprising that role for the show since he felt incorporating elements directly from the films " too quickly " was " cheating on some level " , rather than telling his own standalone story first .
The Shi'ar alien race are mentioned in the season , ahead of their film introduction in the 2019 X - Men film Dark Phoenix .
RELEASE
BROADCAST Section::::Release .
Section::::Broadcast .
The season began airing on FX on April 3 , 2018 , and is set to run for eleven episodes .
Hawley had previously said , in March 2017 , that he expected the season to begin airing in February 2018 .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
Footage from the season debuted at the FX Television Critics Association panel in January 2018 , introducing Negahban as Farouk in an announcement of his casting .
Hawley and several cast members attended the panel .
A trailer for the season was released online at the start of March , and multiple commentators noted that it indicated the noteworthy aspects of the first season would be retained for the second — an unreliable narrative , " stunning " visuals , and significant cast members including Stevens , Plaza , and Clement .
The dancing featured in the trailer and the introductory footage of Negahban were also highlighted .
An artistic video installation created by Marco Brambilla Studio was open to the public at Goya Studios in Los Angeles from March 30 to April 1 , 2018 .
It consisted of a chamber that several people could be sealed in , with a " moving kaleidoscope of imagery from the series " then displayed on screens around the chamber and onto a series of mirrors above to " completely envelope you in a very trippy , very Legion manner " .
The images were backed by music , and included teases of the second season .
Visitors to the exhibit could also get their photo taken with a series of mirrors that evoked the style of promotional posters released for the season .
A " blue carpet " premiere event was held for the season on April 2 , at the Directors Guild of America headquarters in Los Angeles .
RECEPTION RATINGS CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 89 % approval rating for the second season , with an average rating of 7.66/10 based on 30 reviews .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Legion returns with a smart , strange second season that settles into a straighter narrative without sacrificing its unique sensibilities . "
Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned a score of 85 out of 100 based on 10 critics for the season , indicating what the website considers to be " universal acclaim " .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
For the 70th Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards , Dana Gonzales received a nomination for Outstanding Cinematography for a Single - Camera Series ( One Hour ) for the episode " Chapter 9 " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS