A BAD MOMS CHRISTMAS
A Bad Moms Christmas is a 2017 American Christmas comedy film written and directed by Jon Lucas and Scott Moore .
It is a sequel to the 2016 film Bad Moms .
The plot follows the three moms from the first film ( Mila Kunis , Kristen Bell , and Kathryn Hahn ) dealing with their own mothers ( Christine Baranski , Cheryl Hines , and Susan Sarandon ) visiting during the Christmas holiday .
Principal photography on the film began in Atlanta , Georgia in May 2017 , and the film was released by STXfilms in the United States on November 1 , 2017 .
It received mixed reviews , with criticism aimed at the thin story and raunchy jokes , and grossed over $ 130 million worldwide .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Amy ( Mila Kunis ) is now in a happy relationship with Jesse ( Jay Hernandez ) and is looking forward to having a simple Christmas .
Her plans are derailed when her overly critical mother , Ruth ( Christine Baranski ) , texts her to say she is coming for Christmas .
Meanwhile , Kiki ( Kristen Bell ) is still overworked with her four kids but now her husband Kent is much more helpful .
Kiki is surprised when her mother Sandy ( Cheryl Hines ) shows up three days earlier than expected and is planning to spend the next three weeks with Kiki .
Sandy 's love for Kiki is overwhelming , and smothering Kiki .
When Carla ( Kathryn Hahn ) gets home , her mother , Isis ( Susan Sarandon ) , has arrived , telling her she intends to spend time with her for the first time in years .
Surprised by this turn of events Carla is excited to spend time with her .
Eventually , Amy , Kiki and Carla go to the mall where they express their misery over the holidays .
But while commiserating about the pressures of the holidays they make a pact to " take Christmas back " .
Ruth tries to create a spectacle out of Christmas , rather than keeping it simple like Amy wanted .
In an effort to tamp down those plans Amy takes the family to Sky Zone to meet up with Kiki and Carla and their families .
Ruth , Sandy and Isis all meet and chat while their daughters have fun with their kids .
At work , Carla meets an erotic dancer named Ty ( Justin Hartley ) , who says he is competing in a Sexy Santa competition and he asks Carla to be his date , which she enthusiastically accepts .
Kiki continues to have issues with her mother 's overbearing ways and decides to bring Sandy to Dr. Karl ( Wanda Sykes ) to discuss these issues .
This leads to a breakdown in communication leading to Kiki scolding Sandy and causing her to leave the session .
Amy and Kiki join Carla as they attend the Sexy Santa show .
All the ladies in the room are impressed with Ty 's dancing .
To everyone 's surprise , Isis gets up on the bar and starts dancing with Ty .
Carla runs up to get Ty back , leading to a fight .
When Carla brings Isis home , Isis tells her she needs money for a new investment , but Carla knows she 's just going to gamble it all away and then disappear from Carla 's life like it 's been for years .
Nonetheless , Carla relents and loans Isis the money .
On Christmas Eve , Sandy tells Kiki that she put up a cash offer for the house next door so that she can live right next to Kiki .
Finally , Kiki lashes out and tells Sandy she can not live next door and that she wants some space .
Sandy leaves the room crying .
Amy gets angry with Ruth when she discovers Ruth has invited a bunch of strangers over to her home to throw an elaborate Christmas party , exactly what Amy did not want .
Amy loses her temper and demands everyone leave her home and tells Ruth to leave and get out of her life forever .
Her kids , Jane and Dylan , witness this outburst and become upset with Amy .
Meanwhile , Carla finds a note from Isis indicating she has just taken off with the money she lent her .
Kiki is all alone as well .
Ruth goes to church for Midnight Mass and is , surprisingly , joined by Sandy and Isis .
All the ladies criticize each other for their efforts as mothers , with each of them realizing their flaws .
Amy 's father , Hank , goes to her to talk about Ruth and the horrible fight they had , but acknowledging that while Ruth can be difficult to deal with , Ruth has always been incredibly insecure , always worried whether or not she was doing a good job as a mother , but she always had the right intentions and loved Amy unconditionally .
Amy goes to the church where Ruth is in order to try and repair her relationship with her mother .
The two apologise to each other , with both confessing how much they genuinely love each other .
Ruth tells Amy that she is a wonderful mother .
The two embrace tightly .
As the clock strikes midnight , Amy realises that she needs her mother to help her fix Christmas .
The two rush home to start decorating the house properly .
On Christmas morning , Jane and Dylan go downstairs to see that Ruth has returned , the relationship has been repaired and the house looking wonderful with decorations and gifts .
Kiki makes up with Sandy , who tells her she put the neighboring house on the market and admits that she 's just always felt lonely on Christmas since Kiki 's father died .
Carla is then visited by Isis , who is serious about turning her life around and has a new job at Sky Zone .
All the families get together and Ruth , Sandy and Isis announce that they have become friends and are now planning to take a trip to Las Vegas .
CAST
* Mila Kunis as Amy Mitchell
* Kristen Bell as Kiki
* Kathryn Hahn as Carla Dunkler
* Christine Baranski as Ruth Redmond * Cheryl Hines as Sandy * Susan Sarandon as Isis Dunkler * Jay Hernandez as Jesse Harkness
* Justin Hartley as Ty Swindle * Peter Gallagher as Hank Redmond * Oona Laurence as Jane Mitchell * Emjay Anthony as Dylan Mitchell
* Wanda Sykes as Dr. Elizabeth Karl * Christina Applegate as Gwendolyn James * Lyle Brocato as Kent * Cade Cooksey as Jaxon * Ariana Greenblatt as Lori
* Kenny G as himself * Jacks Dean as Bernard PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In December 2016 , it was announced that A Bad Moms Christmas would be released on November 3 , 2017 , and that it would be Christmas - themed , with Bell , Hahn , and Kunis returning to reprise their roles .
The release date was subsequently moved up two days to November 1 , 2017 .
In April 2017 , Justin Hartley joined the cast of the film , and in May 2017 , Susan Sarandon , Christine Baranski , and Cheryl Hines joined as the mothers ' mothers , alongside Wanda Sykes and Jay Hernandez reprising their roles from the first film .
Principal photography on the film began in Atlanta , Georgia on May 1 , 2017 .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
A Bad Moms Christmas was released on Wednesday , November 1 , 2017 .
It was originally scheduled for November 3 , 2017 , but was pushed back two days to avoid direct competition with .
In Australia , the film was released under the title Bad Moms 2 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The film was released on DVD and Blu - ray on February 6 , 2018 in the United States and Canada .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
A Bad Moms Christmas grossed $ 72.1 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 58.5 million in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 130.6 million , against a production budget of $ 28 million .
In North America , the film was projected to gross around $ 25 million from 3,615 theaters in its first five days ( including $ 17 million over the weekend ) .
It took in $ 2.7 million on its first day , and $ 17 million over the weekend , for a five - day total of $ 21.6 million , finishing second at the box office behind .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 30 % based on 116 reviews with an average rating of 4.5/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , "
Featuring twice the moms but roughly half the laughs , A Bad Moms Christmas is a slapdash holiday sequel that falls short of the original with a disappointing dearth of good cheer . "
On Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating to reviews , the film has a weighted average score of 42 out of 100 , based on 30 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B " on an A+ to F scale , down from the " A " earned by the first film , while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave it a " very low " 68 % overall positive score .
Owen Gleiberman of Variety gave the film a mixed review , writing , " A Bad Moms Christmas should appeal to the same —
dare
I say it?—demo that Bad Moms did , even though it 's not nearly as wild a comedy .
It has one halfway original idea , which is that when you 're a mom yourself , the ability of your own mom to drive you nuts is heightened to the third power , because you 're competing on levels that are almost primal . "
Pete Hammond of Deadline Hollywood gave the film a positive review , calling it a " good time movie " and writing : " ...
it goes way over the top , but I have to confess I laughed — a lot — and that 's obviously the point even if this is not critic 's fodder or meant to be .
Subtle this is not , but A Bad Moms Christmas is the perfect tonic to lift your spirits and forget your troubles in these dark times . "
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS *
A Bad Moms Christmas on Rotten Tomatoes