FAHRENHEIT 451 ( 2018 FILM )
Fahrenheit 451 is a 2018 American dystopian drama film written and directed by Ramin Bahrani , based on the book of the same name by Ray Bradbury .
It stars Michael B. Jordan , Michael Shannon , Sofia Boutella , Lilly Singh , Grace Lynn Kung and Martin Donovan .
Set in a future America , the film follows a " fireman " whose job it is to burn now - illegal books , only to question society after meeting a young woman .
After premiering at the 2018 Cannes Film Festival , the film aired on HBO on May 19 , 2018 to mixed critical reviews .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In the future , after a second civil war , most reading in America is confined to the Internet , called " the 9 , " and most books are banned ( except for The Bible , To the Lighthouse and Moby Dick ) and ordered to be burned by the " firemen " who are part of the Ministry , an authoritarian dictatorship that blames unhappiness , mental illness , and conflicting opinions on reading the " wrong " literature .
Guy Montag , a fireman living in Cleveland , goes about his work without question , believing that by following in his father 's footsteps he is serving and protecting society .
All this changes when he meets an informant named Clarisse , who makes him challenge his actions and convictions by sharing with him some of the real history of America and the rise of the Ministry .
When he finally decides to rebel and understand how the " Eels " ( book - reading outcasts ) read , he comes to a realization — he now wants to read as well .
Montag decides to help a rebel who has a plan to reproduce their information through animals .
This rebel group encoded books into a bird 's DNA so that it can live on and survive the efforts of the firemen .
Montag is confronted by Captain Beatty and finds himself on the run , eventually connecting with a group of Eels .
The Eels ' house is discovered by the firemen ; Montag finds the bird and places a transponder inside it so that it can find its way to scientists in Canada .
Captain Beatty confronts him and attempts to stop him , but allows the bird to fly away .
After Montag releases the bird , Beatty burns him alive in a fit of rage .
The starling makes it to Canada , and joins with an immense flock of other starlings .
CAST
* Michael B. Jordan as Guy Montag
* Michael Shannon as Captain John Beatty
* Sofia Boutella as Clarisse McClellan * Khandi Alexander as Toni Morrison
* Lilly Singh as Raven
* Martin Donovan as Commissioner Nyari
* Andy McQueen as Gustavo * Dylan Taylor as Douglas * Grace Lynn Kung as Chairman Mao
* Keir Dullea as Historian PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Ramin Bahrani had been developing an adaptation of Bradbury 's novel as early as June 2016 .
In April 2017 , Michael Shannon and Michael B. Jordan were cast in the film , with Jordan also assuming an executive producer role .
In June , Sofia Boutella boarded the project , YouTube personality Lilly Singh was cast as a vlogger , and Laura Harrier was cast as Millie , Montag 's wife ( who was n't seen in this adaptation for unknown reasons ) .
Filming began in July 2017 , with the additions of Martin Donovan , Andy McQueen and Grace Lynn Kung to the cast in August .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
On January 11 , 2018 , HBO 's Twitter account released a trailer for the film , featuring the tagline , " Fact .
Fiction .
It all burns .
" The film was released on May 19 , 2018 , after premiering at the 2018 Cannes Film Festival .
It was released on DVD and Blu - Ray on September 18 , 2018 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 35 % based on 68 reviews , and an average rating of 5/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Fahrenheit 451 fails to burn as brightly as its classic source material , opting for slickly mundane smoke - blowing over hard - hitting topical edge .
"
On Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating to reviews , the film has a score of 47 out of 100 , based on 19 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
For IndieWire , Ben Travers gave the film a grade of " C+ " , writing that " Michael B. Jordan and Michael Shannon make for a compelling pair in an aptly modernized update that still feels far too conventional .
" Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter praised the production value but wrote that ( referring to the ending of the adaptation ) " as disturbing as the forecast for American life and politics may be in Fahrenheit 451 , this wrinkle nonetheless serves to seriously diminish the absolute need to preserve texts when they 're known to still exist elsewhere ; when America gets its head on straight again , there is backup to resupply the intellectually deprived . "
In his review for Rogerebert.com , Odie Henderson noted the steering of Bradbury 's ideas into the factual realm , drawing parallels with the satirical direction of Network being weakened by the evolution of television , adding that " much of the novel 's shock value and allegorical power also feels weakened as a result . "
IGN 's Matt Fowler wrote that the film " features strong performances and a dancing , flickering visual flare , but all that 's not enough to cover up the clunkiness of the script and the strain of reconfiguring this always relevant -
yet still very 1950s - story to fit within our 2018 specifics " .
Entertainment Weeklys Darren Franich wrote that the film " has its heart in the right place , but its head sure crawled up somewhere . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
width="3 % "
Year !
width="24 % "
Ceremony !
width="45
% " Category !
width="23 % " Nominee(s ) !
width="6 % "
Result ! scope="col " class="unsortable " width="3 % " Outstanding Television Movie Outstanding Cinematography for a Limited Series or Movie Outstanding Fantasy / Sci - Fi Costumes Outstanding Sound Editing for a Limited Series , Movie , or Special Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Limited Series or Movie REFERENCES
SEE ALSO
*
The Handmaid 's Tale - one of the shows critics compared this film to .
* Children of Men - The 2006 film critics also compared this adaptation to .
*
Fahrenheit 451 ( 1966 film )
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Why ' Fahrenheit 451 ' Is the Book for Our Social Media Age - article written by the director on NY Times * Official trailer on YouTube