A WAY OUT ( VIDEO GAME )
A Way
Out is an action - adventure game developed by Hazelight Studios and published by Electronic Arts under their EA Originals program .
It is the second video game to be directed by Josef Fares after .
The game has no single - player option : it is only playable in either online or local split screen co - op between two players .
The game was released for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 4 and Xbox One on March 23 , 2018 , selling over a million copies in two weeks .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
A Way
Out is an action - adventure game played from a third - person perspective .
It is specifically designed for split - screen cooperative multiplayer , which means that it must be played with another player through either local or online play .
In the game , players control Leo and Vincent , two convicted prisoners who must break out of prison and stay on the run from authorities .
As the story of both protagonists is told simultaneously , their progress may not be synchronized , which may result in one player being able to control their character , while another is watching a cutscene .
Players need to cooperate with each other in order to progress , and each situation can be approached differently , with both characters taking different roles .
For instance , during an early segment of the game , the player controlling Vincent needs to distract a nurse and guard , so the player controlling Leo can find a chisel needed to aid their escape .
These roles are not fixed , so Leo and Vincent can swap their roles in another playthrough .
Players can interact with many non - playable characters , and there are dialogue options for players to choose .
Similar to the PlayStation 4 version of Far Cry 4 , players will be able to join online sessions ( hosted by the player 's friends ) whether or not the joining player owns the actual game .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1972 , Vincent Moretti ( Eric Krogh ) is freshly incarcerated and sent to prison for fraud and murder .
In jail , he meets Leo Caruso ( Fares Fares ) , who has now been inside for 6 months for grand theft , assault and armed robbery .
While in the cafeteria , a thug sent in by crime boss Harvey tries to murder Leo , but Vincent intervenes , resulting in both of them being sent to the infirmary while the thug is beat to death after stabbing a prison guard .
While in the infirmary , Leo requests Vincent 's help to steal a chisel from the office .
Vincent complies .
After the theft , Vincent senses that Leo is planning on a prison break and offers to help so that he can escape too .
Leo initially refuses , but begrudgingly agrees to collaborate when Vincent reveals he also has a grudge with Harvey .
Leo and Vincent make progress on their escape plan , stealing sheets to make a rope and smuggling a wrench to open a grating .
Using teamwork and gathered tools , the two escape from the jail on a rainy night .
After evading the police in the wilderness , the two find an empty camp and fish to make food .
Vincent reveals that Harvey had him launder money before murdering his brother as a warning and framing Vincent for the murder .
Leo starts telling his story but is interrupted when a police helicopter flies by , causing both to start moving again .
They later find an old couple 's house , and the two steal new clothes , a shotgun and a truck before evading the pursuing police in the vehicle and , after crashing , a rowboat .
After surviving a waterfall , the duo finds civilisation , after which Leo reveals Harvey and him had stolen a valuable gem , a Black Orlov , but that when Leo tried selling it , Harvey betrayed him by killing their buyer and escaping with the gem , leading to Leo 's arrest .
At a trailer park in the city , Leo confirms the safety of his wife Linda and his son Alex , before going to a construction site with Vincent .
They find Ray , one of Harvey 's underlings who works as a construction foreman , and , after a chase , the two capture and interrogate him to find Harvey 's location , which they find out is Mexico .
Plotting revenge against Harvey , the duo robs a gas station to buy guns from an arms dealer , Jasmine .
When the two leave , Jasmine follows them and betrays them by giving their location to Harvey .
Later , at a telephone booth , Vincent calls Emily , a pilot , and convinces her to fly them to Mexico .
He then learns from her that his wife , Carol , had just gone through childbirth .
The due agrees to go to the hospital , but a hitman sent by Harvey arrives , attempting to kill them , but in the end failing .
They then go to the hospital and Vincent gets to see his newborn daughter , but quickly needs to leave as police officers surround the building .
Leo is captured but manages to escape thanks to a diversion by Vincent .
The next day , Emily flies Leo and Vincent to Mexico , and the two find their way to Harvey 's mansion .
After a firefight with Harvey 's guards and Harvey himself , the two overpower Harvey , force him to return the Black Orlov and , after he attempts to take Leo hostage , kill him .
Escaping with the Black Orlov , Vincent and Leo return to the United States on Emily 's plane , but are immediately surrounded by police upon landing .
An officer takes the Black Orlov from Leo and hands Vincent a gun , revealing that both him and Emily had been undercover police officers .
Leo and Harvey 's Black Orlov deal had actually been arranged by the police , and the dealer killed was Vincent 's brother , Gary .
Feeling betrayed , Leo subdues Vincent , takes him hostage and hijacks a police car to escape .
While trying to avoid a police roadblock , he crashes the car into water .
Both escape the submerged vehicle , Leo stealing a boat while Vincent is picked up by Emily in a police helicopter .
After a chase where Vincent tries to destroy the engine of the boat , Leo jumps off before it crashes into explosive tanks and runs into a portside warehouse .
Emily lands the helicopter and both her and Vincent
chase him inside .
Leo manages to ambush Emily , taking her gun away and ordering her to leave as this fight is between him and Vincent .
The gunfight ends with both sides injured , unarmed , and exhausted on the top of the roof .
Seeing that one of their guns is dropped nearby , both try to reach it , but only one is able to and shoots the other .
The two share a final moment of friendship before the person shot dies from their injuries .
If Leo survives , he takes Vincent 's apology letter and delivers it to Carol , then proceeds to leave town with his family while Vincent 's funeral is taking place .
If Vincent survives , he informs Linda of Leo 's death before returning to Carol , making amends to save their marriage and raise their daughter by revealing he resigned from the police and proclaiming that it 's over .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
A Way
Out was developed by Hazelight Studios , a small team of developers in Sweden led by film director Josef Fares .
Both Fares and several members of his team previously worked on the acclaimed title , from Starbreeze Studios .
Production of the game began in the second half of 2014 .
The design philosophy for the game is that the team wanted to create a cooperative game that is unique and different .
As a result , the team opted not use the traditional drop - in and drop - out cooperative format featured dominantly in mainstream cooperative games , and instead , the team decided to create a full game that must be played cooperatively with another player .
According to Fares , the game was his passion project and he cancelled an upcoming feature film in order to devote more time to working on the game .
The game uses Unreal Engine 4 .
Despite the game 's heavy focus on multiplayer , the game was described as an " emotional adventure " .
As a result , cutscenes will play out even during online play to ensure that players can understand the story of the other character .
The game features a wide variety of gameplay sequences from stealth to driving to ensure that players are often presented with different gameplay situations and generally make the game and its characters more interesting .
To make the two protagonists more realistic , the team ensured that Leo and Vincent have distinct personalities and that they have different opinions and responses while interacting with the game 's world .
Fares Fares , a Swedish - Lebanese actor and Josef Fares ' older brother , plays Leo .
The title will be part of publisher Electronic Arts ' EA Originals program , dedicated to funding small independent games .
The partnership came to fruition when Patrick Söderlund , the Executive Vice President of Electronic Arts , approached Fares personally for collaboration after being impressed by Brothers .
EA offered $ 3.7 million for the development of the game and gave Fares and his team
complete creative control over the game 's development .
According to Fares , all revenue from sales of the game will go back to Hazelight .
The formation of Hazelight Studios and the partnership between Hazelight and EA was officially unveiled at The Game Awards 2014 .
The game 's title and gameplay was revealed at Electronic Entertainment Expo 2017 during EA 's press conference .
The game was released for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 4 and Xbox One on March 23 , 2018 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
A Way
Out received " generally favorable " reviews , according to review aggregator Metacritic .
It sold over a million copies in two weeks .
The game was nominated for Best Co - operative Game at the 2018 Golden Joystick Awards , and for Best Game Direction at The Game Awards 2018 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS