STEPHANIE EDWARDS ( GREY 'S ANATOMY ) Stephanie Edwards , M.D. is a fictional character from the medical drama television series Grey 's Anatomy , which airs on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States .
The character was created by series producer Shonda Rhimes , and was portrayed by actress Jerrika Hinton from 2012 to 2017 .
Introduced as a surgical intern at the fictional Seattle Grace Mercy West Hospital , later renamed Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital , Stephanie works her way up to resident level with fellow intern and friend , Jo Wilson ( Camilla Luddington ) .
The character was described by Hinton as " innovative " who strives to be the best .
The love triangle between Jackson ( Jesse Williams ) and April ( Sarah Drew ) , her relationship with neurosurgery mentor Amelia Shepherd ( Caterina Scorsone ) , her childhood illness as well as her struggles as a burnout have been focal points of her character .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
Stephanie was born with sickle - cell disease .
At the age of five , she was put in a clinical trial at St. Jude that used bone marrow transplants to treat the disease .
The treatment was very effective for her and Dr. Keith Wagner , who ran the study , called Stephanie one of the most successful stories from the trial .
Her memory of the trial is resisting and being told it was for her own good .
There were even times when they had to strap her down to get her to accept the treatment .
As a result of her non - existent childhood , Stephanie ultimately clung to books and used this as inspiration to pursue a career in medicine as a doctor .
In high school , Stephanie was a cheerleading captain and led her team to victory .
She went to college on a cheerleading scholarship .
STORYLINES
Section::::Storylines .
Stephanie starts her internship at Seattle Grace Mercy West after the plane crash .
She and the other interns come to fear Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) and refer to her as " Medusa " .
While working on the case of Graham Cunningham , Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) allows Stephanie the opportunity to do a procedure , even saying that Stephanie is better than Shane .
When Bailey steps in , Cristina backs off , but ultimately decides to let Stephanie close , over Bailey 's objections .
While competing with Leah while they are both on Cristina 's service , they both are indefinitely banned from the OR when their fighting led to Leah hooking up a patient 's oxygen to her IV , a potentially fatal mistake .
When it seems like the hospital is going to be sold , Stephanie starts looking at programs at other hospitals because she wants to be the best and to be the best , she has to learn at the best program .
In the tenth season , Heather dies and Stephanie is given time off like the other interns to grieve .
She gets eye surgery after she feels her glasses got annoying .
Later , Stephanie works on Meredith 's portal vein trial .
Stephanie sides with Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) in surgery over Stephanie and Meredith decides she does not want to work with her anymore .
Stephanie is invited to April Kepner ( Sarah Drew ) 's wedding .
She questions the logic of her not inviting Jackson and questions whether they 're not truly over each other .
Jackson assures her otherwise , but tells April he loves her at the wedding , humiliating her in front of everyone .
Jackson later apologizes after he is married to April .
Stephanie works with Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) on a case of SCID .
The patient Braden Morrin 's parents consent to them using de - activated HIV as a vector to deliver an enzyme to his body , but before the procedure is done , his mother withdraws consent .
Despite this , Bailey proceeds with the procedure , desperate to prove that her research would help people .
When Braden 's t - cell count jumps overnight , Stephanie confronts Bailey about it
and Bailey confirms to her that she had done the treatment without consent .
When Bailey comes clean to the parents , Bailey and Stephanie are both involved in legal meetings .
When the parents announce their intent to sue and get Bailey 's medical license revoked as well as charging her with assault and battery , Stephanie takes the blame , saying that she did n't tell Bailey that the parents had revoked consent and Bailey was covering for her .
They drop the charges and Stephanie is suspended for a week .
In the eleventh season , Stephanie finds a mentor in Amelia Shepherd ( Caterina Scorsone ) as she becomes highly interested in neurosurgery .
Edwards is forced to give April and Jackson
the news that their baby will die .
Amelia and Stephanie make it their mission to remove Nicole Herman ( Geena Davis )
's seemingly impossible tumour .
Amelia manages to remove the tumor , but after several days , Dr. Herman still does not wake up .
Stephanie figures out that Dr. Herman had a small stroke , but luckily Dr. Herman eventually wakes up , but is completely blind .
Amelia instructs Stephanie to live on the high and not beat herself up , as they beat the impossible .
She finishes by declaring themselves " superheroes " .
Stephanie tries her hardest to make her patient remember the pilot with whom she fell in love with in a plane crash .
In the twelfth season , Stephanie must help a patient recover from brain surgery , which brings back bad memories from her childhood of when she was a sickle - cell experiment participant .
Jo accuses Stephanie of lying about her disease , and tries to get Stephanie in trouble with Amelia .
Stephanie confronts Jo at Meredith 's party after Jo gives a misguided apology , saying she ca n't take the fact that she is better than her at the job and tells her to deal with her shortcomings , as Jo used her sick past as a " reason " for her hyper - competence .
Jo is left speechless by this .
Stephanie later deals with a group of cheerleaders in the hospital .
A patient named Kyle comes into the hospital and begins flirting with Stephanie .
They eventually become a couple .
Meredith teases Stephanie about her new love interest , Kyle , after Stephanie accidentally sends Meredith an explicit text meant for him .
Stephanie is kicked off Kyle 's case when Amelia finds out that they 're a couple .
Not being able to operate leads to her breaking up with him .
She thinks breaking up with Kyle was a mistake and almost calls him while drunk .
Later , she learns Kyle is back in the hospital with suspected meningitis , chose not to tell her and angrily refuses to let her be involved .
Stephanie and Kyle reconcile , right before Amelia is unable to save his life in surgery .
In the thirteenth season , Stephanie is surprised by Leah 's return .
Stephanie and Alex go against the wishes of religious parents who do not want to treat their sick child .
Stephanie has an argument with the father , trying to tell him that if anything , God delivered Liam safely for them to treat him , but the father exclaims that she will burn in Hell .
She lashes out and throws a tablet at the wall near the father .
Eliza Minnick gets Stephanie 's privileges revoked and she goes into therapy .
Stephanie returns from therapy earlier after only 3 sessions , but ends up being a hostage to a dangerous patient named Keith who raped another patient .
He holds a scalpel to her throat , demanding to escape the hospital .
Stephanie is unable to evacuate with him due to a lockdown by Bailey to find them .
Keith decides to light a fire to escape .
While he 's distracted trying to get the flames close enough to set off the sprinklers , Edwards makes a move and douses him in the remaining alcohol and sets him on fire .
Edwards grabs the little girl with them , and they get to safety in a room off the hall , but then she sees the man is dangerously close to a flammable cylinder .
She warns the little girl to stay put and runs out to try and prevent it , but she is not fast enough and an explosion occurs , with Edwards ' fate hanging in the balance .
She manages to escape the fire , and saves Erin 's life , but suffers significant burns .
After saving Erin 's life , she collapses .
While getting treatment , she quits her job to explore and travel , and thanks Webber for changing her life , but she needs to move on to see the outside of a hospital as it was her whole life .
DEVELOPMENT CASTING AND CREATION Section::::Development .
Section::::Casting and creation .
Hinton was cast in 2012 as the role of Stephanie Edwards .
The episode 's initial script read - through took place on July 16 , 2012 .
In 2016 , Hinton was poised to exit to star in an ABC pilot series Toast
but it was passed on
and she returned as a regular in season thirteen .
On January 31 , 2017 , it was announced Hinton would depart after the thirteenth season ends after being cast in Alan Ball 's new untitled HBO series .
CHARACTERIZATION Section::::Characterization .
After Jackson professes his love for April at her wedding sitting next to Stephanie , Hinton described it as the " worst kind of betrayal .
It 's one thing to say , ' I 've been harboring these feelings
and I thought I dealt with them
but I have n't
and I 'm actually involving you in this decision . '
But it 's another thing to devastate someone in such a public way in front of people that she has to work with the very next day . "
Hinton expressed enthusiasm for being a part of the storyline involving Dr. Nicole Herman 's tumour with neurosurgery mentor , Amelia Shepherd ( Caterina Scorsone ) in the eleventh season .
Hinton said , " It 's been a while since I 've been this excited because playing the jilted lover , that was something , but now I get to sink my teeth into something !
And I love when I get to do research , and the things that Stephanie is involved with now … somehow or another Grey Sloan is always the place with groundbreaking medical discoveries . "
Hinton elaborated further on Stephanie 's journey in her first 3 years saying , " She got to be a part of Meredith 's ( Ellen Pompeo )
3D printing lab , she got to be a part of Bailey 's ( Chandra Wilson ) genome project , and now she 's going to get to be a part of this third gigantic thing . "
Hinton spoke to The Hollywood Reporter about Stephanie 's relationship with Kyle in the twelfth season .
On Stephanie 's decision to end the relationship , Hinton said , " She has to let it go and walk away because of the pure reality of the situation : Kyle came to her as a sick person and while they were able to mitigate some of that , the circumstances of his illness mean that he will continue to deteriorate , which means he 'll continue to require more care .
For a person like Stephanie , she is so driven and so young .
This is the logic of a younger person .
She does n't have the capacity to give Kyle what he needs .
Even in this week 's episode , we see Stephanie try :
He 's sick and she brings him into the hospital and does the thing she knows how to do — medicine .
She tries to do the thing she knows how to do
and she 's stopped at every turn because her superior says she 's too close to this case .
" This is personal and you ca n't keep apart the personal and the professional here , so I 'm moving you off this .
" That 's a devastating blow for someone who always thinks that she knows the right way .
Granted , she trained under a fantastic mentor [ Amelia ] and she does know the right way to do things .
So to be told , " You are not capable , " is devastating .
That will continue to be the uphill battle she fights , both in trying to carve out her career aside from Kyle and even more so in the relationship with him .
She 's not capable of doing both ; she just ca n't .
So she chooses her career .
Let 's also point out that it 's not like they 've been dating for a year ; they 've been together for maybe six weeks .
She 's considering every bit of reality at her disposal .
And it 's not an easy decision . "
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
After the airing of the ninth season , Natalie Abrams for TV Guide assessed the five new interns introduced and whether to get rid of them or not .
Judging Stephanie , Abrams assessed , " Keep her for now " , and suggested to get rid of Jo and Shane instead .
Speaking further , Abrams said , " She has seamlessly been able to infiltrate the core group by ...
well , sleeping with one of them .
Her fling with Jackson ( Jesse Williams ) has been a fun story line that recalls the early days when [ Cristina and Meredith ] sleeping with their own attendings .
[ ... ] [ she ] could [ ... ] fall victim to being the other woman [ with Jackson and April ] .
But that potential story line could be a fun respite from a season otherwise dominated by the sale of the hospital . "
In the twelfth season , Caroline Siede for The A.V. Club felt that " Without a love interest or a trusted mentor , Stephanie is a bit unmoored at the moment .
And on a show all about interconnectivity , that will hopefully allow her to stir things up a bit . "
Siede praised Kyle ( Wilmer Valderrama ) and Stephanie 's break - up as well as Hinton 's portrayal later in the episode " " You 're Gon na Need Someone On Your Side " .
She assessed : " In her final conversation with Jo
she explains that after spending so much time as a helpless patient when she was a kid , she took control of her life by forging a new identity as a doctor .
Going back to that " patient " ( or in this case , patient 's loved one ) identity is too painful for her [ ... ] even though I was n't particularly invested in their relationship beforehand , I was unexpectedly moved by their breakup .
There 's something selfish about Stephanie 's decision to walk away , but I can also completely understand her rationale .
Selling the audience on both a relationship and its breakup is a pretty impressive feat for one episode to pull off and
Jerrika Hinton deserves a lion 's share of the credit for that .
" Writing for " At Last " , Siede was disappointed that the relationship between Kyle and Stephanie was n't explored more but enjoyed the chemistry between the characters , as well as the tragedy of his death .
She noted the " quiet dignity to Stephanie 's grief that I 'm excited to see Hinton explore in the future . "
Gwen Inhat , writing for The A.V. Club praised the character in her notes for " True Colors " questioned , " Is Stephanie alive or dead ?
Since Jerrika Hinton is moving on , I would n't put anything past this show .
But if Stephanie goes down a hero , that was an awesome way to go .
Will really miss that actress and character . "
Lauren Hoffman for Cosmopolitan felt the scenes involving Stephanie being a hostage and getting into an explosion were " wildly over the top , but it 's the first time I 've felt true , scary suspense during a Grey 's episode in a really long time " .
Maggie Fremont for Vulture assessed the episode saying , " if I shed any tears during " True Colors , " they were out of fear for Stephanie 's safety as Keith dragged her around a mystifyingly empty hospital .
That got real . "
In the thirteenth season finale , Hinton made her final appearance as Edwards .
Inhat for The A.V. Club assessed that her absence would be felt .
Maggie Fremont for Vulture said , " it 's tough to bid farewell to one of the show 's best characters , especially one who did n't always get her due .
Both Stephanie and Jerrika will be missed . "
Justin Kirkland for Entertainment Weekly felt that " Stephanie Edwards is possibly in the top three most tragic Grey 's Anatomy characters of all time .
Think about it — left by her boyfriend at a wedding , lost her boyfriend ( and then was given essentially zero plot time to assess that loss ) , did the heavy lifting for a surgeon who was in crisis during one of her most important surgeries ( shout out to Dr. Herman ) , and here we are , presumably dealing with our natural - haired , crazy - talented , third - wave intern star lying somewhere next to a rapist , crisp as they come .
Oh , Stephanie .
You deserved better . "
On a more critical note , Lauren Hoffman for Cosmopolitan felt that while she enjoyed Hinton 's performance , Edwards was underutilized compared to earlier interns like " George and Izzie " and that it was " hard to make a character you only really get to play every few weeks
feel like yours
and I understand why [ Jerrika is ] moving on .
I 'm also happy her character got to do so without getting murdered or fired , although she 's probably going to be legitimately traumatized by the part where she burned a rapist to death ?
But I 'm so confused about why Stephanie cited her childhood spent in hospitals as the reason she had to get out of surgery .
That was her reason for getting into surgery .
It just feels like lazy writing ( or a willful ignorance of Stephanie 's backstory ) . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Stephanie Edwards on IMDb