THE RESIDENT ( TV SERIES )
The Resident is an American medical drama television series aired by Fox Broadcasting Company that premiered on January 21 , 2018 , as a lead - out to the Vikings - Eagles NFC Championship , and as a mid - season replacement entry in the 2017–18 television season .
The fictional series focuses on the lives and duties of staff members at Chastain Park Memorial Hospital , while delving into the bureaucratic practices of the hospital industry .
The show was purchased by Fox from Showtime in 2017 .
It was created by Amy Holden Jones , Hayley Schore , and Roshan Sethi .
On May 10 , 2017 , Fox ordered a full 14-episode season and renewed the series for a second season on May 7 , 2018 .
The first season officially concluded on May 14 , 2018 .
During the 2017–2018 United States television season , the series ranked # 41 and averaged 7.02 million viewers .
The second season premiered on September 24 , 2018 .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
The series revolves around the lives and actions of staff members at Chastain Park Memorial Hospital located in Atlanta , Georgia , primarily those of third - year resident internist , Conrad Hawkins ; first - year medical intern , Devon Pravesh , who is assigned to Hawkins ; as well as Nicolette " Nic " Nevin , a nurse practitioner and Hawkins ' love interest .
Exploring the inner workings of the characters ' duties in emergency and hospital medicine , medical malpractice and deliberate violations of medical ethics are also examined , as well as the bureaucracy of the health care industry .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* Matt Czuchry as Conrad Hawkins : a senior resident internist at Chastain Park Memorial Hospital .
* Emily VanCamp as Nicolette " Nic " Nevin : a nurse practitioner at Chastain Park Memorial Hospital .
* Manish Dayal as Devon Pravesh : a first - year resident internist at Chastain Park Memorial Hospital .
* Shaunette Renée Wilson as Mina Okafor : a surgical resident at Chastain Park Memorial Hospital .
* Bruce Greenwood as Randolph Bell : chief of surgery , later CEO , at Chastain Park Memorial Hospital .
* Moran Atias as Renata Morali ( season 1 ) : head of publicity at Chastain Park Memorial Hospital .
* Merrin Dungey as Claire Thorpe ( season 1 ) :
former CEO at Chastain Park Memorial Hospital .
* Melina Kanakaredes as Lane Hunter ( season 1 , guest season 2 ) : an oncologist at Chastain Park Memorial Hospital .
She also owns her clinics .
* Malcolm - Jamal Warner as AJ " The Raptor " Austin ( season 2 , recurring season 1 ) : a cardiothoracic surgeon who joins Chastain Park Memorial Hospital at Bell 's and Okafor 's urging .
* Glenn Morshower as Marshall Winthrop ( season 2 ; recurring season 1 ) : Conrad 's estranged father and chairman of the board at Chastain Park Memorial Hospital .
* Jane Leeves as Kitt Voss ( season 2 ) : an orthopaedic surgeon .
RECURRING
* Tasie Lawrence as Priya Nair : a reporter and Devon 's fiancée .
* Violett Beane as Lily Kendall ( season 1 ) : one of Lane 's chemotherapy patients .
* Warren Christie as Jude Silva : a trauma surgeon .
* Tasso Feldman as Irving Feldman : an ER doctor .
* Jessica Miesel as Jessica Moore , a gossip - loving scrub nurse .
* Jocko Sims as Ben Wilmot : an attending doctor .
* Patrick R. Walker as Micah Stevens : a teacher who is a repeat patient of Conrad 's and Mina 's romantic interest .
* Steven Reddington as Bradley Jenkins : a former surgical doctor at Chastain Park Memorial Hospital .
* Catherine Dyer as Alexis Stevens : head nurse at Chastain Park Memorial Hospital .
* Jenna Dewan as Julian Booth ( season 2 )
* Vince Foster as Dr. Paul Chu : Chief Anesthesiologist .
EPISODES
SEASON 1 ( 2018 )
SEASON 2 ( 2018 - 2019 )
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
On August 5 , 2016 , it was announced that Showtime was developing a new original series , known as The City , pitched by executive producer , Antoine Fuqua .
It was also announced that Amy Holden Jones would produce the series and co - write the pilot episode along with Hayley Schore and Roshan Sethi .
The series , however , was never produced and on January 20 , 2017 , it was reported that Fox purchased the series from Showtime and ordered a pilot episode under the name , The Resident .
On May 10 , 2017 , the series received a full season order of 14 episodes .
Phillip Noyce , an executive producer for the series , directed the first two episodes of the season after signing a multi - year deal with 20th Century Fox Television .
On May 7 , 2018 , Fox renewed the series for a 13-episode second season and pre - production began on June 8 , 2018 .
On October 10 , 2018 , it was reported that Fox ordered an additional nine episodes for the second season , bringing the total episode count to 22 .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
On February 21 , 2017 , Manish Dayal and Bruce Greenwood were the first to be cast in the series for the roles of Devon Pravesh and Soloman Bell , respectively .
Greenwood 's character name was later changed to Randolph Bell .
Matt Czuchry , Emily VanCamp , and Melina Kanakaredes were later announced to be starring in the series as well .
Moran Atias was also cast for the role of Renta Thorpe , CEO at Chastain Park , which was originally portrayed by Valerie Cruz in the pilot .
However , when Merrin Dungey joined the cast , the producers saw Atias as a better fit for the role of the hospital 's head of marketing .
Dungey replaced her as the CEO and the character 's name was changed to Claire Thorpe .
As the season developed , it was announced that Violett Beane was set to recur in the series , and on April 30 , 2018 , it was reported that Malcolm - Jamal Warner would have a major recurring role in the final three episodes of the season .
On June 18 , 2018 it was announced that Warner and other recurring cast member , Glenn Morshower would be promoted to series regulars for the second season .
The following day , it was announced that Moran Atias , Merrin Dungey and Melina Kanakaredes would not be returning , and that Jane Leeves would also be joining the cast as a regular for the second season on a one - year contract .
On July 16 , 2018 , it was announced that Jenna Dewan is set to recur on season 2 .
It was later announced on August 27 that Daniella Alonso had also been cast in a recurring role for the second season .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Primary photography for the series takes place in and around Atlanta , Georgia .
Exterior and some interior shots of the High Museum of Art in midtown - Atlanta were used as the backdrop for the fictional Chastain Park Memorial Hospital .
Some filming also took place in Conyers , Georgia , on a production set previously used for Fox 's Sleepy Hollow .
Filming for the first production block took place between March 20 and April 5 , 2017 .
Filming for the second season began in July 2018 .
BROADCAST , STREAMING , AND HOME VIDEO RELEASE
Section::::Broadcast , streaming , and home video release .
In the United States , new episodes are broadcast by Fox .
Internationally , the series is shown on Seven Network in Australia , City ( season 1 ) and CTV ( season 2 ) in Canada , and on Universal TV in the United Kingdom and Ireland .
In Latin America , the series is broadcast by Fox 's Latin America counterpart .
Episodes can be watched next day on the network 's website .
Hulu currently owns the SVOD rights to the series , and individual episodes , or the season as a whole , are available for purchase on Amazon and iTunes .
The first season DVD set was made available for pre - order in June 2018 through Amazon and was released on October 2 , 2018 .
!
scope="col " rowspan="2 " Season !
scope="col " rowspan="2 " Episodes ! scope="col " colspan="4 " DVD release dates !
scope="col " colspan="4 " Blu - ray release dates !
scope="col " Region 1 ! scope="col " Region 2 ! scope="col " Region 4 ! scope="col " Discs ! scope="col " Region A/1 ! scope="col " Region B/2 ! scope="col " Region C/3 ! scope="col " Discs RECEPTION RATINGS SEASON 1 SEASON 2 CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The review aggregator website , Rotten Tomatoes , reported an approval rating of 61 % based on 18 reviews , with an average rating of 4.89/10 .
On Metacritic , which uses a normalized rating to reviews , assigned a weight average score of 54 out of 100 , based on 12 critics .
The first season received mostly mixed reviews .
USA Today rated the series 1/2 out of 4 stars stating
" It 's a shame , because it 's a waste of the talents of Czuchry and VanCamp ( Revenge ) , two usually appealing TV veterans " and " The Resident ca n't save itself " .
Meanwhile , TV Line rated the series a B+ and said , " The Resident takes a hard look at the thorny ethical issues surrounding today 's health - care providers .
" The first season was also often compared to ABC 's medical drama , The Good Doctor .
The series also proved to be unpopular with medical officials .
A current medical student stated " It harms the public by grossly misrepresenting core concepts of medicine " .
A second medical student indirectly called the series unrealistic .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Nominee !
Result !
Ref .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS