ONE LOVE MANCHESTER
One Love Manchester was a benefit concert and British television special held on 4 June 2017 , which was organised by American singer and actress Ariana Grande in response to the bombing after her concert at Manchester Arena two weeks earlier .
The concert took place at Old Trafford Cricket Ground in Old Trafford , Greater Manchester , and aired live on BBC One in the UK with hosts Sara Cox and Ore Oduba .
The concert was attended by 55,000 people .
Guest stars included Justin Bieber , the Black Eyed Peas , Coldplay , Miley Cyrus , Marcus Mumford , Niall Horan , Little Mix , Katy Perry , Take That , Imogen Heap , Pharrell Williams , Robbie Williams and Liam Gallagher .
Proceeds from the event benefit the We Love Manchester Emergency Fund , which was established by the Manchester City Council and the British Red Cross following the 22 May bombing , which killed 22 concert goers and injured more than 500 .
The funds will go to help the victims and their families .
The British Red Cross reported it received more than £ 10 million in donations in the 12 hours following the concert .
Despite time zone differences , networks from at least 50 countries broadcast the concert live , which was simultaneously streamed live on various platforms , including Twitter , Facebook and YouTube .
New York Magazines Vulture section ranked the event as the No . 1 concert of 2017 .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
On 22 May 2017 , a suicide bombing was carried out at Manchester Arena in Manchester , England , following a concert by Ariana Grande as part of her Dangerous Woman Tour .
22 of the concert - goers and parents who were in the entrance waiting to pick up their children following the show were killed , more than 500 were injured and 116 of those were seriously injured .
A few hours after the bombing , Grande posted on Twitter : " broken .
from the bottom of my heart , i am so so sorry .
i do n't have words .
"
The tweet briefly became the most - liked tweet in history .
Grande subsequently suspended her tour and flew to her mother 's home in Boca Raton , Florida .
On 26 May , she announced that she would host a benefit concert in Manchester for the victims of the attack .
BEFORE MAIN EVENT DEVELOPMENTS AND PLANNING Section::::Before main event .
Section::::Developments and planning .
Event tickets were made available on 1 June 2017 for £ 40 , and sold with no booking fees .
These tickets sold out within 6 minutes of going on sale .
Fans who were at the concert of 22 May could apply to attend at no cost .
The application ended on 31 May at 17:00 , but was extended till 22:00 to allow as many people at the concert on the 22nd to apply to be there as possible .
Metrolink offered free travel for concertgoers to and from the Old Trafford tram stop .
Uber also said that fares of passengers travelling to and from the concert will be donated to charity .
Following the London attack that occurred a day before the show , Greater Manchester Police announced that security would be tighter than planned .
They also advised attendees not to bring bags into the venue for security reasons .
Tickets for the concert were found to be listed for sale on the online auction site eBay , at prices above the original sales price .
However , eBay responded by removing these listings from their site .
MAIN EVENT Section::::Main event .
A minute 's silence was held before Marcus Mumford opened the concert , at the request of Mumford , in memory of those killed both in Manchester and in London .
After Grande 's first performance of the night , Stevie Wonder appeared via video link .
After Heap 's performance , a video of prominent Manchester footballer David Beckham reading a poem dedicated to the city was played .
Videos of other artists and celebrities , including Halsey , Bastille , Anne - Marie , Demi Lovato , Jennifer Hudson , Blossoms , Chance the Rapper , Camila Cabello ,
The Chainsmokers , DJ Khaled , Little Mix , Circa Waves , Kendall Jenner , Clean Bandit , Dua Lipa , Sean Paul , Nick Grimshaw , Kings of Leon , Sam Smith , Rita Ora , Shawn Mendes , Twenty One Pilots , Paul McCartney , U2 and the players of Manchester United and Manchester City declaring their solidarity with Manchester were also shown .
Liam Gallagher made a surprise appearance near the end of the concert .
Previously , he had stated he wanted to perform but indicated a conflict with the Rock i m Park festival in Germany .
He flew in straight from his performance in Germany .
Coincidentally , he was also scheduled to perform at the Rock am Ring festival two days prior , but the rest of that festival day was cancelled before his scheduled performance due to terror suspicions .
Usher was due to appear but did not perform .
He appeared with other musicians in the pre - recorded video sending best wishes to Manchester .
SET LIST BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
The concert was broadcast live on BBC One , BBC Radio and Capital FM networks .
Television coverage on BBC One was presented by Sara Cox and Ore Oduba , with Nick Grimshaw and Anita Rani hosting from backstage and within the crowd .
BBC Radio coverage consisted of a simultaneous broadcast , hosted by Scott Mills , Jo Whiley , Phil Williams and Becky Want , on BBC Radio 1 , BBC Radio 2 , BBC Radio 5 Live and BBC Radio Manchester respectively .
BBC World Service also transmitted the concert live .
The BBC announced that it would broadcast the entire concert even if it overran its intended three - hour duration , which it did by approximately 20 minutes .
UK RADIO STATIONS Section::::UK radio stations .
The event was broadcast live on at least 65 British radio stations , including 39 Global - based music stations : the entire Capital FM , Heart FM , Gold , Radio X and Smooth Radio networks .
INTERNATIONAL BROADCASTERS Section::::International broadcasters .
Broadcasters in at least 38 countries screened the concert live , despite the time zone differences .
The BBC was the host broadcaster for international television networks , and the European Broadcasting Union ( EBU ) distributed the concert to its radio members , which was also streamed online .
Radio broadcasters were provided the concert through the BBC World Service 's programme distribution network .
Stations that broadcast the concert were invited to make donations through the British Red Cross .
* Albania : RTSH 2 and Radio Tirana 2
*
Argentina :
TN ( live ) , E !
* Australia : BBC UKTV ( live ) and Nine Network
* Austria : oe24.tv
* Belgium : Eén , La Trois , Pure FM and MNM
* Brazil : Multishow
* Bulgaria : Horizont and BNT 1 * Canada : CTV ( live ) , Much ( live ) , Virgin Radio and Vrak *
Chile :
E !
* China : Tencent
* Colombia : E ! * Czech Republic :
ČT art * Denmark : TV 2 * Estonia : ETV and * Finland :
Yle TV2
* France : TMC , Mouv '
* Germany :
1LIVE , RBB Fernsehen , , NDR 2 , and DASDING
* Greece :
ERT1
* Greenland : TV 2 * Hong Kong : ViuTVsix
* Iceland : RÚV and Rás 2 * Ireland : RTÉ2 and RTÉ 2fm
* Italy : Rai 1 , Rai 4 , Rai Radio 2 , RTL 102.5 , and Super !
* Latvia : Latvijas Radio 5
* Lithuania :
LRT Radijas
* Mexico :
E !
* Netherlands : NPO 3 and NPO 3FM * New Zealand : TVNZ 1 and BBC UKTV
* Norway : NRK3
* Peru : E !
* Philippines : ANC * Poland : RMF FM
* Portugal : RTP1
* Romania :
TVR1 , TVRi
* Sierra Leone : Capital Radio Sierra Leone
* Slovakia : Dvojka
* Slovenia : Radio Val 202
* Sweden :
SVT24 and Sveriges Radio P3
* Switzerland : RTS Deux and Radio SRF 3
* Taiwan : KKBox * United States : Freeform ( live ) and ABC ( highlights ) ONLINE
STREAMING Section::::Online streaming .
The concert was streamed live online across a number of websites and apps , such as YouTube , Twitter and Facebook .
ATTENDANCE AND RATINGS Section::::Attendance and ratings .
The 50,000-capacity venue sold out within 20 minutes .
Approximately 14,000 people who attended the original Ariana Grande concert were eligible for free tickets for the One Love Manchester concert .
However , approximately 10,000 additional applications , from people ineligible for free tickets , caused delays in ticket processing .
The concert averaged 10.9 million viewers on BBC One , peaking at 14.5 million viewers .
22.6 million people watched at least three minutes of the programme on BBC One , making it the UK 's most - watched television event of 2017 .
The concert reached an audience share of 49.3 percent in overall viewers , 69 percent of adults 16–24 and 61 percent in the demographic of 25–34 year - olds .
Consolidated 7-day figures put the average UK viewership at 11.63 million .
BBC iPlayer registered more than one million live - stream requests , making One Love Manchester the biggest non - sports programme in iPlayer 's history , surpassing the 2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony .
MONEY RAISED
Section::::Money raised .
The British Red Cross received £ 2.35 million ( nearly $ 3 million ) in donations during the three - hour concert for the We Love Manchester Emergency Fund .
By the next day , the British Red Cross announced it had received more than £ 10 million ( $ 13 million ) since the attack , and subsequently , reports have set the total at more than £ 17 million ( $ 23 million ) .
Grande also donated all proceeds to the fund from a re - release of her single " One Last Time " and a live audio version of " Somewhere Over the Rainbow " that she performed during the concert . !
Original concert ticket holders !
General ticket holders !
Total attendance !
Ticket sale !
British Red Cross !
EIF Facebook Fundraising !
Total amount raised REACTIONS Section::::Reactions .
Francis Wilkinson , in Bloomberg.com , wrote that Grande offered " a face that was brave and kind in the wake of terror while accomplishing several useful goals – raising money for victims , bolstering courage and making the attacks look both puny and pointless .
Whatever the terrorists had hoped to produce in Manchester , it certainly was n't this party .
" She received praise for her " grace and strength " in organizing , hosting and performing at the concert .
Madeline Roth of MTV News wrote that the performance " bolstered courage among an audience that desperately needed it . ...
Returning to the stage was a true act of bravery and resilience " .
The City of Manchester named Grande as an honorary citizen of the city following the singer 's " great many selfless acts and demonstrations of community spirit " and will be the first to be awarded from the city .
Kory Grow in Rolling Stone , wrote " It felt incredibly safe .
As I made my own way to the tram , I wrote in my Apple Notes app , " Helicopter hovering overhead , " which to me signified that the fans were being watched over .
Then two policemen stopped me and asked me who I was with and whether I 'd written anything about a helicopter into my phone , without explaining the technology of how they 'd read my Notes app .
After a friendly back - and - forth , they looked through my bag , checked my ID and business card and determined I was n't a threat .
" You have to understand , tensions are running high , " one of the men said with a smile and a handshake , allowing me through the gate .
Manchester was secure tonight . "
Dee Lockett , in New York Magazines Vulture section , ranked the event as the No . 1 concert of 2017 , noting :
SEE ALSO
* 2017 in British television * A Concert for Charlottesville REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS