ONCE UPON A TIME ( SEASON 7 )
The seventh and final season of the American ABC fantasy - drama Once Upon a Time was ordered on May 11 , 2017 .
It consisted of 22 episodes , airing on Fridays , having premiered on October 6 , 2017 .
This season marked a significant change for the series , as it was announced at the end of the sixth season that the majority of the main cast members would not be returning for season 7 .
Lana Parrilla , Colin O'Donoghue , and Robert Carlyle were the only ones remaining .
Andrew J. West and Alison Fernandez were announced as new regulars in May 2017 .
Dania Ramirez and Gabrielle Anwar were announced as additional regulars in July 2017 .
In August 2017 , it was announced that Mekia Cox had been promoted to series regular after initially joining the cast in July as recurring .
The storyline was softly rebooted with a main narrative led by an adult Henry Mills , set several years after last season 's events .
In February 2018 , it was announced the seventh season would serve as the final season of the series ; the season and series concluded on May 18 , 2018 .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
Several years after the Final Battle , Henry Mills leaves Storybrooke in search of his own story , only to find himself in the New Enchanted Forest , where a conflict between Lady Tremaine , Cinderella , Drizella , a resistance led by Tiana , and Mother Gothel 's Coven of the Eight culminates in the casting of a new curse that sends the New Enchanted Forest inhabitants to Seattle in the past , before Henry leaves Storybrooke .
As Henry 's daughter Lucy sets out to restore his belief , Gothel 's coven builds its sinister agenda and contends with a witch hunter , while Dr. Facilier embarks on his own power grab for the Dark One dagger .
However , the breaking of the curse results in the return of Rumplestiltskin of the Wish Realm who intends to doom everyone to a miserable end , and amplify his own powers .
His defeat ultimately leads to Regina 's decision to merge all the realms , uniting them into one : the United Realms , with Regina crowned the Good Queen .
CAST AND CHARACTERS REGULAR
* Lana Parrilla as Evil Queen / Regina Mills /
Roni /
The Good Queen * Colin O'Donoghue as Captain Hook / Killian Jones / Rogers * Andrew J. West as Henry Mills * Dania Ramirez as Cinderella / Jacinda Vidrio
* Gabrielle Anwar as Rapunzel / Lady Tremaine / Victoria Belfrey * Alison Fernandez as Lucy Mills / Lucy Vidrio * Mekia Cox as Tiana / Sabine * Robert Carlyle as Rumplestiltskin /
Mr. Gold / Weaver RECURRING
* Jared S. Gilmore as young Henry Mills /
Sir Henry
*
Adelaide Kane as Drizella /
Ivy Belfrey * Rose Reynolds as Alice / Tilly * Bruce Blain as Samuel B. Ryce / Desk Sergeant * Trevor Roberts as Remy * Emma Booth as Mother Gothel /
Mother Nature / Eloise Gardener * Emilie de Ravin as Belle * Chris Gauthier as Smee * Rebecca Mader as Wicked Witch of the West / Zelena /
Kelly West * Daniel Francis as Dr. Facilier /
Mr. Baron Samdi * Robin Givens as Eudora * Meegan Warner as young Rapunzel / Lady Tremaine
* Tiera Skovbye as Robin Hood / Margot * Nathan Parsons as Hansel / Jack / Nick Branson
* Yael Yurman as Anastasia
* Jeff Pierre as Prince Naveen /
Drew
* Chilton Crane as the Blind Witch / Hilda Braeburn
GUEST * Jillian Fargey as the Fairy Godmother * Liam Hall as the Prince
* Jennifer Morrison as Emma Swan * Giles Matthey as Gideon
* Kevin Ryan as Robert * Matty Finochio as Marcus Tremaine * Cindy Luna as Cecelia
* Anna Cathcart as tween Drizella * Lula Mae Melench as young Drizella
* Alejandra Perez as young Ella
* Sophia Reid - Gantzert as young Anastasia
* Sara Tomko as Tiger Lily * Suzy Joachim as Madame Leota * Nisreen Slim as the Hedge Witch /
Dr. Andrea Sage * Chad Rook as Captain Ahab
* Elle McKinnon as young Alice * Charles Mesure as Blackbeard * Kip Pardue as Chad * Dan Payne as Ivo
* Seth Isaac Johnson as young Hansel
* Sara Canning as Gretel
* Lily van der Griend as young Gretel * Kyra Leroux as Yarrow * Emily Tennant as Isla * Naika Toussaint as Seraphina
* Gabrielle Miller as Mother Flora * Beverley Elliott as Widow Lucas / Granny * Robbie Kay as Malcolm / Peter Pan * Victoria Smurfit as Cruella De Vil * JoAnna Garcia Swisher as Ariel
* Timothy Webber as the Apprentice
* Ginnifer Goodwin as Snow White / Mary Margaret Blanchard * Josh Dallas as Prince Charming / David Nolan * Sean Maguire as Robin Hood
* Tony Amendola as Geppetto / Marco * Lee Arenberg as Grumpy /
Leroy * Jack Davies as Pinocchio * Faustino Di Bauda as Sleepy / Walter
* Gabe Khouth as Sneezy /
Mr. Clark * Keegan Connor Tracy as the Blue Fairy /
Mother Superior *
Raphael Sbarge as Jiminy Cricket /
Dr. Archie Hopper * David Paul Grove as Doc EPISODES Section::::Episodes .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
In January 2017 , while season 6 was still in production , ABC president Channing Dungey spoke of a possible " reset " of the show 's narrative in the event that the show received a season 7 order .
After much speculation , executive producers Adam Horowitz and Edward Kitsis later confirmed that certain characters would have their storylines wrapped up and that the back - end of the sixth season had been written with the season 7 narrative change in mind .
Despite the major changes from seasons past , the showrunners have said that they do not view season 7 as a complete reboot of the show .
Horowitz said : " I hesitate to use the word ' reboot . '
We 're more thinking about it as a hybrid of a lot of things .
We 're paying homage to the original premise , but there are certain characters who are returning and some who are not .
It 's a combination of a lot of things , but what we 're trying to do is go in a new direction but stay true to the spirit of what the show has always been . "
In July 2017 , the creators announced that the series now take place in the Seattle neighborhood of Hyperion Heights , which was created under a new and darker curse .
Residents of this neighborhood include displaced characters from the original and new versions of the Enchanted Forest , as well as regular people from the Land Without Magic .
This differs from Storybrooke in season 1 , which was an isolated town that was blocked off from real - world Maine .
The initial villain is Lady Tremaine , who assumes the role of an urban developer who seeks to " gentrify the neighborhood " and push out and separate fairy tale residents .
Meanwhile , Storybrooke and various Fairy Tale Land locations still appear in the flashbacks of the season as the story bounces back and forth between the characters ' lives before and during the latest curse .
The main flashback setting of the seventh season is the New Enchanted Forest , which is a New Fairy Tale Land realm .
Other locations featured in flashbacks are the Edge of Realms , the Wish Realm , New Wonderland , Oz , and Storybrooke itself .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
In May 2017 , it was announced that Lana Parrilla , Colin O'Donoghue , and Robert Carlyle would be the only series regulars from season 6 to continue onto season 7 .
It was teased that the three would be portraying their original characters but with cursed identities , similar to the circumstances in season 1 .
In July , the first promo of the season revealed that Killian is now a Seattle police officer with the last name Rogers , who is living with an unexplained sense of loss .
In August , it was revealed that Regina is now a bar owner named Roni , who is more dressed down and is " no longer in charge . "
Former main cast member Jennifer Morrison has confirmed that she has agreed to return for one episode , later revealed to be the second episode of the season .
Morrison announced her last filming day on July 19 , 2017 .
On July 22 , it was confirmed that Emilie de Ravin would return for the fourth episode in the seventh season .
In March 2017 , Andrew J. West and Alison Fernandez were cast for unknown guest roles in the season six finale .
During the episode , it was revealed that West was portraying an adult Henry Mills , while Fernandez portrayed his daughter , Lucy .
After that episode 's airing , they were confirmed as series regulars for season 7 .
West will be taking over the role from Jared S. Gilmore , who has been confirmed to appear in at least the first two episodes of the season .
On July 6 , 2017 , it was announced that Dania Ramirez and Gabrielle Anwar would be two additional series regulars for season 7 .
Additionally , Adelaide Kane , Mekia Cox , and Rose Reynolds were cast in recurring roles for the upcoming season .
On July 15 , it was announced that Ramirez would be portraying Cinderella , albeit a different version from the one previously played by Jessy Schram for the first six seasons .
On July 22 at San Diego Comic - Con , it was revealed that Anwar and Kane will be portraying Lady Tremaine and Drizella , respectively .
Cox would be portraying Tiana from The Princess and the Frog , while Reynolds would be playing an alternate version of Alice , a character previously heavily featured in the spin - off Once Upon a Time in Wonderland .
In August 2017 , Cox was promoted to series regular .
On August 1 , it was announced that Giles Matthey would return as an adult Gideon for the season 's fourth episode .
The episode , also featuring Emilie de Ravin , would be centered around Rumple .
On that same day , it was also announced that Emma Booth was cast in a major recurring role as the Witch , whose more specific identity would be revealed later on during the season .
On August 25 , Kevin Ryan announced that he would be making an appearance as a new prince in the upcoming season .
On August 30 , it was announced that Robin Givens had been cast as Tiana 's mother , Eudora .
On September 8 , it was announced that Meegan Warner would be guest starring as an alternate version of Rapunzel , a character previously featured in one episode of season 3 .
It was later revealed that the character would appear in a multi - episode arc .
On September 20 , it was announced that former main Rebecca Mader would return for multiple episodes in the seventh season as Zelena , who will also have a cursed identity .
On October 2 , it was announced that Dr. Facilier from The Princess and the Frog would make an appearance during the season , later revealed to be portrayed by Daniel Francis in the season 's fifth episode .
On October 3 , it was announced that flashbacks of the ninth episode would feature a " tweenage " Anastasia , Lady Tremaine 's other biological daughter .
On November 1 , it was announced that Tiera Skovbye would be recurring as an older version of Robin , the daughter of Zelena and Robin Hood .
On November 2 , it was announced that Nathan Parsons had been cast in a recurring role as Nick , a lawyer and potential love interest for another character .
On November 3 , it was announced that the show was casting for the role of Naveen from The Princess and the Frog , who will be recurring in the second half of the season .
It was later revealed that the role would be played by Jeff Pierre , who will first appear in the twelfth episode of the season .
On November 16 , actor Chad Rook announced that he had been cast in an unknown role .
On January 23 , 2018 , it was announced that Kip Pardue had been cast as Chad , Zelena 's fiancé from when she was cursed as Kelly .
He will make his first appearance in the seventeenth episode of the season .
On March 16 , it was announced that multiple former cast members were set to appear in one or both of the series ' last two episodes .
This includes former mains Jared S. Gilmore ( who had also been confirmed to appear in the twentieth episode ) and Sean Maguire , as well as formerly recurring stars JoAnna Garcia Swisher , Victoria Smurfit , Robbie Kay , Beverley Elliott , Lee Arenberg , Keegan Connor Tracy , and Tony Amendola .
On March 21 , it was announced that Jennifer Morrison and Emilie de Ravin would be back a second time , along with Ginnifer Goodwin and Josh Dallas for the final episode of the series .
In addition , Raphael Sbarge , David Paul Grove , and Faustino Di Bauda later confirmed that they were also appearing in the series finale .
RATINGS REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS