ELLEN 'S GAME OF GAMES
Ellen 's Game of Games , also known as Game of Games and stylized as ellen 's GAME OF GAMES , is an American television game show that premiered on December 18 , 2017 .
In March 2017 , NBC ordered six ( later eight ) hour - long episodes of the series .
Ellen DeGeneres serves as host , while Stephen " tWitch " Boss appears as announcer / sidekick .
The series is based on game segments from DeGeneres ' daytime talk show , The Ellen DeGeneres Show .
A special preview episode aired on December 18 , 2017 , with the official series premiere on January 2 , 2018 .
On January 9 , 2018 , NBC renewed the series for a 13-episode second season .
SERIES
OVERVIEW FORMAT Section::::Format .
Each episode is a self - contained mini - tournament with contestants being selected to play in one of four preliminary games .
The winner of each game advances to the semi - final round to play " Know or Go .
" The last remaining player will play the " Hot Hands " game for a chance to win $ 100,000 .
PRELIMINARY GAMES
*
Aw Snap : Contestants are joined by a bungee cord .
The first contestant to move five apples into a basket using only their teeth advances .
* Blindfolded Musical Chairs : Five contestants are blindfolded .
In four different heat levels , the contestants have to dance around until the music stops .
DeGeneres then presses buttons that cause a number of stools to rise up from the dance floor .
As in musical chairs , the contestants who are able to sit on one of the chairs , advance to the next round .
The one contestant left standing in each heat is eliminated .
At the end of the fourth round , the final contestant advances .
On the Christmas special , this game is also known as " Blindfolded Musical Packages " * Danger Word : For this game , two teams of two people each compete to guess their team 's " winning word .
" One member of each team stands by DeGeneres and acts as a clue - giver ; the other member of the team sits behind three cannons .
For each round , there is a " winning word " and a related " danger word " ( e.g. , winning word " lettuce " , danger word " salad " ) .
The two teams then alternate giving clues , similarly to the game Password .
If a guesser gives the winning word , the opposing team gets a strike — and the opposing guesser gets sprayed with something from one of the cannons .
If a guesser says the danger word , their team is given a strike , and the guesser is sprayed .
The first team to get three strikes is eliminated and the winning team chooses one contestant to play " Know or Go . "
* Dizzy Dash : The game starts with DeGeneres reading aloud a trivia question to the contestants .
Before contestants can answer , they are spun around in order to disorient them .
To answer the question , the contestants must run to a nearby podium and grab the ball on top of it .
The first contestant to answer three questions correctly advances to the next round .
* Do n't Leave Me Hanging :
In this game , three contestants are suspended in the air from harnesses .
The contestants take turns to guess answers that fit a given category , such as " States that end in ' A ' " .
A category ends when one contestant gives an incorrect answer , repeats a previous answer , or takes too long to respond ; when that happens , the contestant gets a strike .
A contestant who gets three strikes is eliminated and launched to the top of the studio .
*
In Your Face , Honey : This is a game played with couples that compete against each other .
One member from each couple attempts to throw a ball as close to a target as possible .
Whichever couple accumulates the most points after two attempts decides who will advance to " Know or Go . "
* Make It Rain : For this game , two contestants answer trivia questions asked by DeGeneres for turns at pulling down one of several umbrellas .
One of the umbrellas contains a cash prize of $ 10,000 , in addition to a chance at playing " Know or Go .
" The rest of the umbrellas are filled with water .
* Master Blaster :
This game involves three contestants attached to bungee cords .
The contestants then compete to solve a jigsaw - style puzzle .
The losing contestants are " blasted " into the air and do not proceed to the next round .
* One - Eyed Monster : In this game , one by one , contestants enter a prop monster .
They must answer a question with the numbers : 0 , 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , or 5 .
For each wrong answer , the contestant must pull one of the monster 's teeth ( e.g. , if the correct answer is 3 , saying either 2 or 4 results in pulling one tooth ) .
However , if the contestant gets the answer exactly right , he or she will not have to pull out any of the monster 's teeth and is safe .
Pulling the wrong tooth causes the monster 's jaws to snap shut , eliminating the contestant .
*
Say Whaaaat ?
: This game involves two teams of four that compete against each other .
One member of the team must relay a message to the other member who is wearing a set of headphones and therefore must use lip reading .
The team that collects the most points wins and chooses one member to compete in the " Know or Go " round .
If there is a tie , the teams must play again .
* Scary - Go - Round : Contestants in this game must try to move three large balls across a series of rotating platforms within three minutes .
The second contestant can fire balls from a " ball blaster " to impede the first contestant 's progress .
The contestant who completes the task in the fastest time wins .
If there is a tie , the contestants must play again .
* Tuba Toothpaste :
Contestants are seated before a row of buttons shaped like valves on a tuba .
DeGeneres then poses challenging trivia questions to each contestant .
Contestants who give correct answers are safe .
When contestants answer incorrectly , DeGeneres spins a wheel to determine how many valves ( one , two , or three )
the contestant must press .
One of the valves causes the tuba to eject toothpaste at the contestant .
When that happens , the player is eliminated and the other contestants advance .
*
You Bet Your Wife : In this game , two teams of spouses or fiancés compete against each other .
One partner from each couple is suspended from the ceiling in a harness .
The other two partners do an auction - style bid on how many answers their partners can give in a given category ( e.g. , " national brands of toothpaste " ) within the 30-second timeframe .
When one of the partners on the ground issues a challenge , the other team 's suspended partner must give the required number of responses .
There is no penalty for incorrect answers .
Giving the required number of responses earns that team one point , while the opposing team 's suspended partner gets dropped .
If the challenged team fails , the corresponding spouse is dropped .
The first team to earn three points wins and chooses one member of the pair to advance .
On the Christmas special , this game is also known as " It 's a Wonderful Wife " KNOW OR GO Section::::Know or Go .
The contestants that won their preliminary games , answer questions based on a variety of topics .
When an incorrect answer is given , the contestant is dropped through a trap door .
The question - and - answer rounds continue until one contestant remains .
A major criticism of the rule is a contestant can win the game without having to answer a question when opponents all fail .
Starting in Season Two , when two contestants remain , the round ends and new rules are put in effect .
When one contestant misses , the other remaining contestant must answer the same question correctly to win the game .
Both players will remain in the game if neither player answers the question correctly .
The game ends when one contestant misses , and the opponent correctly answers the same question .
HOT HANDS Section::::Hot Hands .
The contestant has 30 seconds to identify the faces of ten celebrities that fit a certain category ( e.g. " 80s Stars " ) .
After identifying a celebrity , the contestant must press a button to move on to the next face .
Contestants may pass if they are unsure but will need to wait three seconds until the next face automatically appears .
Contestants earn an escalating amount of money based on the number of faces they correctly identify , as shown in the table below .
Correctly identifying ten celebrities earns the grand prize of $ 100,000 . !
Correct answers !
1 !
2 !
3 !
4 ! 5 !
6 !
7 ! 8 ! 9 !
10 $ 100 $ 1,000 $ 2,500 $ 10,000 $ 20,000 $ 30,000 $ 40,000 $ 50,000 $ 75,000 $ 100,000 RATINGS SEASON 1 SEASON 2 INTERNATIONAL VERSIONS Section::::International versions .
In Germany , Sat.1 broadcasts a local version of the show hosted by Bülent Ceylan , which has broadcast since 14 September 2018 .
In Australia , Network Ten has a local version of the show , hosted by Grant Denyer which began on 7 October 2018 .
In Spain , Antena 3 will air a local version , hosted by Silvia Abril REFERENCES