AGENTS OF S.H.I.E.L.D. ( SEASON 5 )
The fifth season of the American television series Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , based on the Marvel Comics organization S.H.I.E.L.D. ( Strategic Homeland Intervention , Enforcement , and Logistics Division ) , revolves around the character of Phil Coulson and other S.H.I.E.L.D. agents and allies as they try to save humanity .
It is set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe ( MCU ) , sharing continuity with the films of the franchise .
The season is produced by ABC Studios , Marvel Television , and Mutant Enemy Productions , with Jed Whedon , Maurissa Tancharoen , and Jeffrey Bell serving as showrunners .
The season was ordered in May 2017 .
Alongside Clark Gregg , who reprises his role as Coulson from the film series , principal cast members Ming - Na Wen , Chloe Bennet , Iain De Caestecker , Elizabeth Henstridge , and Henry Simmons return from previous seasons , while Natalia Cordova - Buckley was promoted to the principal cast after appearing in a recurring role since season three .
Due to its broadcast schedule , the season was split into two " pods " : the first sees the S.H.I.E.L.D. team transported to a future in which the Earth has been destroyed ; in the second , they attempt to prevent this future in the present .
The end of the season dovetails with events of the film .
Gregg made his directorial debut on the series during the season , which features the series ' 100th episode that was promoted with a special commemorative art program .
The fifth season began airing on December 1 , 2017 , and ran for 22 episodes on ABC until May 18 , 2018 .
The two - part premiere debuted to 2.54 million viewers , marking the lowest - rated season premiere of the series .
Despite consistently low viewership , critical reception of the season was positive , with many commending the series for its ambition , in particular praising the futuristic space setting during its first half and exploration of time travel .
Critics also praised the performances , character development and writing .
The series was renewed for a sixth season on May 14 , 2018 .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN * Clark Gregg as Phil Coulson
*
Ming - Na Wen as Melinda May * Chloe Bennet as Daisy Johnson /
Quake * Iain De Caestecker as Leo Fitz * Elizabeth Henstridge as Jemma Simmons * Henry Simmons as Alphonso " Mack " MacKenzie * Natalia Cordova - Buckley as Elena
" Yo - Yo " Rodriguez RECURRING * Jeff Ward as Deke Shaw * Joel Stoffer as Enoch * Eve Harlow as Tess * Dominic Rains as Kasius * Florence Faivre as Sinara * Pruitt Taylor Vince as Grill
* Coy Stewart as Flint * Catherine Dent as Hale * Lola Glaudini as Polly Hinton * Dove Cameron as Ruby Hale * Brian Patrick Wade as Carl Creel * Briana Venskus as Piper * Maximilian Osinski as Davis
* Spencer Treat Clark as Werner von Strucker
* Peter Mensah as Qovas * Adrian Pasdar as Glenn Talbot /
Graviton NOTABLE
GUESTS
* Nick Blood as Lance Hunter
* J. August Richards as
Mike Peterson / Deathlok
* Zach McGowan as Anton Ivanov /
The Superior * Reed Diamond as Daniel Whitehall * Adam Faison as Jasper Sitwell * Joey Defore as Wolfgang von Strucker
* Ruth Negga as Raina * David Conrad as Ian Quinn PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
In January 2017 , ahead of the mid - season premiere of the fourth season , ABC 's Channing Dungey said that she was " very bullish " about S.H.I.E.L.D.s future , feeling that " the episodes just keep getting better and stronger " .
The series was renewed for a fifth season of 22 episodes on May 11 , with ABC looking to lower the cost of the series moving forward , by reducing its budget and licensing fee .
Asked whether she had considered giving the season a shorter episode order , Dungey noted that every season of the series had been 22 episodes long , and she felt its prior success in delayed viewership and overseas justified continuing that .
She added that the " show has continued to grow creatively every season .
I feel like last season [ was ] its strongest creatively yet .
I 'm very excited for what we have planned for Season 5 .
" It was reported that Disney , the parent company of Marvel Television , ABC Studios , and ABC , had given a mandate to ABC to renew Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. " despite the desire by some at the network to end the series " .
WRITING Section::::Writing .
In May 2017 , ahead of the fifth season renewal , showrunner and executive producer
Jed Whedon said the writers were not sure what would happen in the season , and that it would be " by the seat of our pants .
" The season explores the ramifications of Phil Coulson making a deal with Ghost Rider at the end of the previous season , as well as the groundwork laid by Aida for humans to fear S.H.I.E.L.D. and Inhumans .
Whedon stated , " The public perception of S.H.I.E.L.D. is at an all - time low , so we have not resolved that , and there will be still more fallout from it . "
Moving beyond the Framework reality established at the end of season four , Tancharoen said the emotional impact from the characters ' experiences would " be something that resonates throughout the season " , especially for Fitz and Mack .
When asked if the season would be broken into pods as with season four , executive producer Jeffrey Bell said , " A 22-episode arc is a lot for people to hold onto .
By breaking it up into either smaller arcs or different pods , by introducing a set of antagonists and putting them down , or moving from space to space , our experience has been that it 's something the viewers enjoy , and it makes it a little easier to digest when you 're telling some of these stories . "
However , Whedon noted that it would depend on how the season would be aired as to where the story is broken up .
The season ultimately was broken into two pod story arcs , with each pod having a different emphases , but the whole season having an arc " that will pay off " .
The writers for the season began work at the end of May 2017 .
FIRST POD Section::::First pod .
The first pod of the season was informally referred to by the production team as S.H.I.E.L.D. in Space .
Ahead of the season premiere , executive producer Maurissa Tancharoen said that " every year we reset the series , and this year we definitely knew that it would be the most giant reset to date [ with the characters going to space ] .
Just creatively across the board for everyone , art direction , all of it , our sets , you 'll see an overhaul .
" On the move to space , Whedon commented , " Last year was about tearing everybody apart .
We spent a lot of time doing that ...
So our goal this year was ...
putting [ this ] family together in an intense situation [ that ] will end up causing drama internally , inevitably ... we 've spent this many years with them , let 's throw them on the craziest roller coaster adventure we could think of .
" The main characters eventually return home to their time period .
SECOND POD Section::::Second pod .
The second pod of the season includes the series ' 100th episode , which Whedon and Tancharoen described as a " game changer " that would " shake up " the rest of the pod emotionally , to the point that " nothing will be the same after " it .
Bell added the episode featured " a device that grows out of our current storyline and plot that allows us to look back and reflect on where we 've come from , turn over a couple cards that people will be excited about and then also celebrate the show and people on it . "
Loeb also felt the episode " finishes up some stories that perhaps [ viewers ] did n't even know we have n't revealed " .
The episode featured Fitz and Simmons getting married , which Tancharoen said was included because " it was about damn time .
After 100 episodes , they needed to get married . "
Coulson 's deal with Ghost Rider was also revealed , which was to have the Kree serum that revived him after his death be burned off , resulting in his chest wound slowly killing him .
Whedon said that Coulson has " come to terms with it .
It 's something he actually had to come to terms with a long time ago when he was discovering the T.A.H.I.T.I. Project and everything that had been done to him .
I do n't think he wants to go through any of that again .
He 's ready for nature to take its course ... he seems as much at peace with it as you can be considering there 's so much
he 's done in a world that thinks he 's dead . "
At the end of February 2018 , the writers were planning the end of the pod , and were planning for the final episode to be able to serve as both a season and series finale , with some elements that could be adjusted based on whether the series was renewed for a sixth season or not .
Whedon added , " we 're ready for if this is the end .
We 're definitely going to make it rewarding either way .
" The season ends with the agents having to make a choice between Coulson 's life or saving the world , which was " where we were always going " when the showrunners were plotting out the season .
By killing Fitz in " The End " , but revealing there was another still in space journeying to the future , Bell noted it helped solve " the one time loop problem we had " .
Whedon explained when deciding when to bring the characters back to the present , it was discussed to have them return to the diner where they were taken , but Fitz would still be there , so the group was brought back after Fitz left to avoid that problem , which " became this great opportunity .
What we realized is the thing that would weirdly have the most impact , one of the most painful things that you can experience , could be then experienced and then , not brought back , but a loophole could be revealed . "
The showrunners spoke to not including a bonus scene at the end of " The End " to tease what would come , Tancharoen said , " We felt like it needed to end in Tahiti .
To take away from that would be wrong . "
Bell added , " It 's also , emotionally , about the two senior members of the team , who in a sense have retired to Tahiti , and there they are watching the future of S.H.I.E.L.D. fly off into a new adventure ...
It felt like a nice , succinct ending . "
Coulson 's journey was always meant to end at Tahiti , something the showrunners revealed was decided since the start of the series .
Whedon explained , " We thought it was a beautiful image ...
It 's one of the things where you do n't overthink it .
We latched onto that and went , ' That will be great . '
It 's an emotional thing for him .
We even heard from Mike Peterson that this was something he always wanted .
Our big mystery in episode 1 was , " Never been to Tahiti . "
He does n't know , and he can never know .
And here he is , finding some sort of peace on that beach .
We love that image and we were solid on it all the way . "
CASTING Section::::Casting .
Main cast members Clark Gregg , Ming - Na Wen , Chloe Bennet , Iain De Caestecker , Elizabeth Henstridge , and Henry Simmons return from previous seasons as Phil Coulson , Melinda May , Daisy Johnson / Quake , Leo Fitz , Jemma Simmons , and Alphonso " Mack " MacKenzie , respectively .
Before the 2017 New York Comic - Con , it was revealed that Natalia Cordova - Buckley had been promoted to series regular for the season , after recurring in the past two seasons as Elena " Yo - Yo " Rodriguez .
De Caestecker also portrays " The Doctor " , the version of Fitz from the Framework reality .
In September 2017 , former series regular Nick Blood was announced as returning to reprise his role of Lance Hunter .
Blood left the series during the third season , to star in the spin - off series Marvel 's Most Wanted , which never came to fruition .
Adrianne Palicki , who portrayed Bobbi Morse and also left in the third season for Most Wanted with Blood , expressed interest in October 2017 in returning to guest star in the season , saying she " would absolutely come back " if asked .
Also returning from earlier in the series are Joel Stoffer as Enoch , who was simply credited as " silhouetted man " in his previous appearance , and Lola Glaudini as Polly Hinton .
Polly 's daughter Robin also appears , portrayed by multiple actresses , after the character made an uncredited appearance in " Ascension " : Lexy Kolker appears as 7-year - old Robin , Ava Kolker appears as 12-year - old Robin , and Willow Hale appears as an older Robin , when she is also known as The Seer .
Adrian Pasdar reprises his role as Glenn Talbot , while also becoming the villain Graviton in the season .
This is despite the series introducing Franklin Hall ( portrayed by Ian Hart ) in the first season , who goes on to become the villain in the comics .
Additional returning actors include Brian Patrick Wade as Carl Creel , J. August Richards as Mike Peterson / Deathlok , Spencer Treat Clark as Werner von Strucker , Zach McGowan as Anton Ivanov /
The Superior , Reed Diamond as Daniel Whitehall , and Raquel Gardner as Carla Talbot , along with Briana Venskus and Maximilian Osinski as S.H.I.E.L.D. agents Piper and Davis .
Ruth Negga and David Conrad reprise their roles as Raina and Ian Quinn , respectively , in a flashback sequence set during the events of the season one finale , " Beginning of the End " .
The characters Lash and Hive return from earlier seasons for the series ' 100th episode .
Younger versions of Jasper Sitwell and Wolfgang von Strucker also appear , portrayed by Adam Faison and Joey Defore , respectively .
Older versions of the characters had been respectively portrayed by Maximiliano Hernández ( in the MCU films and first season of the series ) and Thomas Kretschmann ( in the MCU films ) .
Jeff Ward was cast in a recurring role in August 2017 , and was revealed in October to be portraying Deke Shaw .
Ward had originally been cast as Virgil , a character who dies in the first episode .
During the table read of the episode , the main cast felt Ward " nailed it " as Virgil and wanted him to stay on as Deke , who had not yet been cast .
The producers reached out to Ward after the reading to audition for Deke , and was ultimately cast in the part .
Also in October , other newcomers were revealed , with Eve Harlow as Tess , Coy Stewart as Flint , and Pruitt Taylor Vince as Grill .
The next month , Marvel revealed that Dove Cameron had joined the season in an unspecified role , which was revealed in January 2018 to be the character Ruby , the daughter of Catherine Dent 's General Hale .
Other recurring guests for the season include Dominic Rains as Kasius , Florence Faivre as Sinara , Jay Hunter as a Kree watch commander , Tunisha Hubbard as Ava , Shontae Saldana as Candice Lee , and Peter Mensah as Qovas .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
After leaving the series during the fourth season , costume designer Ann Foley returned for the first two episodes of the fifth season , before handing over to Whitney Galitz , who had assisted her on the previous few seasons , and Christann Chanell .
The opening for " Orientation " is reminiscent of the sequence for " 4,722 Hours " , forgoing the title card and having the typeface silently fading onto the screen .
The subsequent episodes of the season feature a title card with the series name in a new typeface against a backdrop of various depictions of Earth : episodes through " Past Life " feature a destroyed future Earth ; episodes from " Principia " through " The Devil Complex " feature a present Earth ; while episodes from " Rise and Shine " through " All Roads Lead ... "
feature the Earth beginning to crack .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Filming for the season began on July 20 , 2017 .
In May 2017 , Gregg expressed interest in directing an episode in the season , and confirmed that September he would be directing an episode , which was the sixth of the season , " Fun & Games " .
Gregg felt the idea of directing was " daunting " as he would need to be doing " five weeks of double duty " , needing to act in addition to the various aspects of directing the episode .
He reached out to fellow S.H.I.E.L.D. directors Kevin Tancharoen , Billy Gierhart , and Jesse Bochco to get tips on filming for the series .
Bennet felt Gregg was able to bring out performances from the cast " that another director probably would n't have been able to because he knows the characters so well . "
Gregg added that he had " shorthand with [ the other actors ] about what we want to try to do , ways the script could give us a chance to push us into new territory .
They all also have deep and interesting ideas that helped me . "
Gregg also received a deeper appreciation for some of the other departments on the series he normally does not encounter on a regular basis and the work they contribute to each episode .
The scene for Fitz and Simmons ' wedding in " The Real Deal " was filmed in " a very remote location " in Placerita Canyon State Park .
Filming for the season wrapped on April 15 , 2018 .
MARVEL CINEMATIC UNIVERSE TIE - INS
Section::::Marvel Cinematic Universe tie - ins .
In terms of having connections to Marvel 's Inhumans , Whedon felt it was doubtful , but noted " we also want there to be a bigger reward for people who watch all of [ the MCU series ] , so they 'll start to see that there 's lines connecting it .
It 's more fun for people who are playing the whole game , but if you do n't , you 'll still have a great rollercoaster ride . "
In November 2017 , Whedon said that the season would not have moved the characters to space if the recent MCU films like Guardians of the Galaxy Vol .
2 and had not been exploring that part of the MCU , but that this would remain a " thematic tie " .
He explained that they had moved on from the overt tie - ins with the MCU films that the series utilized in earlier seasons because " we have our own mythology .
That started to be much more interesting to us , and hopefully to the audience ...
No one wants to come to see our show to see another show .
"
Whedon added in March 2018 that the then - upcoming release of would similarly " open a new playground " for the series to explore .
The season features the Kree , an alien race that previously appeared in the first three seasons , and in the film Guardians of the Galaxy .
The fictional element gravitonium also returns , having first appeared in the first season .
It is revealed that the consciousnesses of Franklin Hall and Ian Quinn had been absorbed by the element , eventually merging with Talbot when he enters the Rebirth chamber and becomes Graviton .
The last four episodes of the season are set during the events of Infinity War , taking place over a single day and making references to the film ; Whedon stated that there was an " unspoken Marvel rule not to address time " but that they considered the events of the series and film to roughly line up .
In the episodes , the threat of Thanos becomes the driving force of Talbot 's character arc as he plans to join the Avengers in defending the Earth .
Bell also spoke to not directly referencing the end of Infinity War in " The End " , by not showing any of the characters killed as a result of Thanos ' finger snap .
He said " Part of what happened was , they changed the release date ...
we move at a different schedule than they do and so suddenly everything was a week earlier , and so we had to make some adjustments
and that 's how we end up with our story .
" Whedon continued , " the other thing is that there 's certain story points that are so – there would really be no way for us to address it and keep our show intact .
Given that there 's coming out , and there 's gon na be constant repercussions of their universe , so what we felt was that the safe play for our story , and for the integrity of our universe , was to operate outside of it . "
Whedon also added , " one of the things that we tried to do was even if we 're just hinting at a crossover , our concept was to create motivation for our villain , for our antagonist – using the events of Infinity War and using the larger MCU battle to sort of inform [ Talbot 's ] motivation to become what he 's becoming .
That was our main tie - in , trying to drive our own antagonist .
We felt like that was a good way to deal with it , but keep the things in world in our story . "
RELEASE BROADCAST
Section::::Release .
Section::::Broadcast .
The season began airing in the United States on ABC on December 1 , 2017 , beginning once Inhumans finished airing its episodes .
It is set to run for 22 episodes , with a short hiatus for the airing of the 2018 Winter Olympics between " Past Life " and " All the Comforts of Home " .
The season concluded on May 18 , 2018 .
The fifth season moved to a Friday timeslot , alongside the seventh season of ABC 's Once Upon a Time , with ABC chief Channing Dungey explaining , " We 've turned Friday into more of a destination for our fantasy and science fiction fans .
Once Upon a Time and S.H.I.E.L.D. are airing on the same night for the first time , which is giving many fans of both shows what they 've been asking for for a long time . "
Andy Kubitz , executive vice president for program planning and scheduling at ABC , added that ABC had " confidence that [ the S.H.I.E.L.D. ] core audience ... [ would ] travel with it " to its new Friday time slot .
He continued , " The great thing about Friday night for these shows is it gives three days of downtime for a lot of these younger viewers to be able to catch up on it .
You 've got Saturday and Sunday viewing that will be able to be counted into our C3 to help us monetize it . "
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
The main cast of the season appeared at New York Comic Con on October 7 , 2017 , where they promoted the season and debuted the first 20 minutes of the first episode of the season .
A shortened version of the footage was released by ABC and Marvel on November 26 , 2017 , as a sneak peek before the season premiere later that week .
Marvel released three roundtable discussions in support of the series reaching 100 episodes .
Hosted by Patton Oswalt , who has portrayed The Koenigs in the series , the first was released on March 8 , 2018 with the women of the series .
The second , which release on March 9 , featured the full cast , while the third debuted on March 12 with the executive producers .
All premiered on Marvel.com while also being available on Marvel and the series ' social media platforms and Marvel 's YouTube channel .
The executive producers , main cast members except Gregg , and Ward appeared at WonderCon on March 24 , 2018 , to promote the remainder of the season and answer fan questions .
A clip from the end of " Rise and Shine " was also shown .
" THE ROAD TO 100 " Section::::"The Road to 100 " .
In December 2017 , Marvel announced the " Marvel 's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. :
The Road to 100 " art program to commemorate the series reaching 100 episodes .
The program features five posters , one for each season of the series , representing " key pivotal moments of each season " .
The art also appeared as variant covers to select titles published by Marvel Comics in March 2018 .
Megan Thomas Bradner , Vice President of Development and Production , Live Action at Marvel Television , called reaching 100 episodes " quite a feat ... and it felt special enough to share with the fans that got us here .
By working with some of our favorite comic artists , we felt we could show a large variety of meaningful moments and the characters that helped get us to a 100 . "
She added that the program " commemorates these creators , the actors , the characters and a hundred amazing stories " .
The first poster , highlighting season one , was created by Dale Keown .
It features four panels , showcasing the moment Coulson and Grant Ward approached Skye in her van from the pilot , Coulson learning he survived the Battle of New York from the T.A.H.I.T.I. program and a drug from a half - dissected Kree alien corpse , the moment Grant Ward revealed he was a Hydra agent by killing Victoria Hand , and Fitz giving Simmons the last remaining oxygen tank and declaring his love for her in the season one finale .
The second poster , highlighting season two , was created by Daniel Acuña .
The scenes depicted are Coulson writing the Inhuman map on a wall ; Daisy coming out of her Terrigenesis ; the S.H.I.E.L.D. team , Bobbi Morse , Lance Hunter , and the " real S.H.I.E.L.D. " logo ; and May cradling the deceased body of Katya Belyakov .
The third poster , highlighting season three , was created by Nick Bradshaw .
The poster shows the S.H.I.E.L.D. team and Hive , along with the Hydra logo breaking the S.H.I.E.L.D. logo and its tentacles covering much of the poster .
Specific moments highlighted include Fitz and Simmons after she has been pulled from the portal to Maveth , Coulson killing Ward on Maveth , and the formation of the Secret Warriors .
The fourth poster , highlighting season four , was created by Rahzzah .
It highlighted the introduction of Ghost Rider , Life Model Decoys ( LMD ) and the Framework reality , Jeffrey Mace sacrificing himself in the Framework , and Coulson 's kiss with the May LMD .
The fifth and final poster , highlighting this season , was created by Stonehouse .
Flanked on either side are Kasius and Sinara , with the S.H.I.E.L.D. team and Deke in the center in front of the destroyed Earth of the future as well as Fitz reuniting with Simmons .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The season began streaming on Netflix in the United States on June 17 , 2018 .
RECEPTION RATINGS Section::::Reception .
Section::::Ratings .
The season averaged 3.57 million total viewers , including from DVR , ranking 133rd among network series in the 2017–18 television season .
It also had an average total 18 - 49 rating of 1.1 , which was 97th .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reports a 100 % approval rating , with an average score of 7.71/10 , based on 18 reviews .
Reviewing the premiere episodes , Merrill Barr of Forbes felt moving the series to space was not a reboot of the series , rather " a continuation , in some form , of the story set - up at the end of last season .
The show is not different .
The team is still trying to save the world .
They 're just doing it in a new place and new way .
Overall , there 's a lot to love about what S.H.I.E.L.D. is doing in the new season .
It 's a crazy ride fans are going to be glad they 've stayed aboard for .
The " Agents of Hydra " run [ at the end of season four ] was a bit weak .
The space run is so far proving to be anything but . "
Jon Negroni of We Got
This Covered praised the show for its delightful twists and turns and for not relying on what 's already worked , adding that " it 's a testament to the show 's ongoing experimentation that we can watch these characters get to space and believe that this is far from their final frontier . "
He felt , however , that there was " little room for pathos and seeds for character development " and that " we know almost nothing about where these individuals are at emotionally because of
how fast we blazed through the finale .
"
Alex McLevy of The A.V. Club praised the move to space , saying that " if season four was Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. firing on all cylinders , especially during its stellar ' Agents of Hydra ' arc in the Framework , then this is the look of a show that knows it has mastered its storytelling , and is confidently expanding the scope of its ambition . "
ACCOLADES REFERENCES
GENERAL
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS