THE DARKEST MINDS
The Darkest Minds is a 2018 American science fiction thriller film directed by Jennifer Yuh Nelson , and written by Chad Hodge , based on Alexandra Bracken 's young adult novel of the same name .
The film stars Amandla Stenberg , Harris Dickinson , Mandy Moore , and Gwendoline Christie , and follows a group of teenagers who are on the run from the government after mysteriously obtaining superpowers .
The film was released in the United States on August 3 , 2018 , by 20th Century Fox .
It received negative reviews from critics and grossed $ 41.1 million worldwide against its $ 34 million production budget .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
A sudden disease kills over 98 % of the children throughout the United States , leaving the survivors with unusual abilities .
As a result , the governments of the world place the survivors in a " rehabilitation camp " , where they attempt to cure the children of their disease , distinguishing them into classes based on their abilities .
Ruby Daly celebrates her tenth birthday with her family , where her father gives her a keychain .
Seeing her parents ' concern about the disease , Ruby goes to comfort her parents in the night , touching their hands , and inadvertently erasing all their memories with Ruby .
In the morning , her mother locks Ruby in the garage ; having no recollection of her , she sends Ruby to an internment camp , where Ruby is determined to be an Orange , the most dangerous class where they have the abilities to control other people 's minds and memories .
Ruby uses her abilities to convince her supervisor that she is a Green , the least dangerous one with extremely high intelligence .
Six years later , Ruby is found out to be an Orange following a test using a frequency that is only detectable by Oranges .
Cate Begbie , a doctor whose real name is Cate Connor , reveals herself to be part of the Children 's League , an organization that uses the survivors as soldiers , and helps Ruby in her escape from the camp .
The two make their way to a gas station , where Cate provides Ruby with a pendant that can be activated into a tracker in the case she is in danger .
Cate introduces her to an associate of the League ; a suspicious Ruby makes her escape from the station with a quiet little girl named Suzume , a Gold who has the ability to control electricity .
Suzume , shortened to Zu , introduces Ruby to her friends , Liam , a Blue who has telekinetic abilities , and Charles , known as Chubs , a Green , who agreed to let Ruby join them as they try to make their way to a safe haven , led by another Orange " Slip Kid " .
The group heads to an abandoned mall to gather supplies , where they cross paths with another group of survivors , who give a clue about the haven 's location , through the letters ' EDO ' .
Chubs deduces that they are actually numbers ' 540 ' , which lead to a radio transmission , revealing the location of the haven .
The group make their way there ; along the way , Ruby and Liam begin to develop a romantic connection , but Ruby refuses to touch him , fearing that her powers will hurt him .
At the haven , " Slip Kid " is revealed to be the president 's son , Clancy , who teaches Ruby how to control her powers , and in turn , has Ruby teach him on how to erase people 's memories .
Clancy , who is revealed to have imprisoned his father and taken over the government , attempts to use this to rid Ruby of her negative thoughts and turn her to his side , but she manages to escape with the others .
Liam flees with all of the camp members and Zu , while Ruby faces off against Clancy , ultimately exploding the camp and making her escape with Chubs , who is severely injured in the chaos .
Liam reunites with Ruby and an unconscious Chubs in the woods , where Ruby uses her pendant to signal Cate for help .
Ruby and Liam are taken in by the League , while Chubs is taken to a hospital to recover and Zu is reunited with her cousin .
Ruby convinces Cate to release Liam and have her take his place as a soldier .
Knowing that Liam will never leave her , Ruby kisses him and erases all of his memories with her .
Liam leaves the camp , while Ruby begins her training with her fellow League members as a weary Clancy raises an army of his own .
CAST
* Amandla Stenberg as Ruby Daly , a teenager with the ability to get into people 's minds who escapes from her government camp and finds a group of runaways looking for East River .
* Lidya Jewett as Young Ruby * Harris Dickinson as Liam Stewart , a kid with telekinesis in the group of runaways .
Ruby 's love interest .
* Skylan Brooks as Chubs , a kid with super intelligence in the group of runaways .
* Miya Cech as Suzume
" Zu " , a kid with electrokinesis in the group of runaways .
* Patrick Gibson as Clancy Gray , the president 's son , who , like Ruby , has the power of getting into people 's minds .
* Mandy Moore as Dr. Cate Connor , a doctor and member of a group fighting against the government * Gwendoline Christie as Lady Jane , a bounty hunter of superpowered teens who escape from the camp * Golden Brooks as Molly Daly , Ruby 's mother and Paul 's wife * Wallace Langham as Dr. Viceroy * Mark O'Brien as Rob Meadows * Bradley Whitford as President Gray , Clancy 's father PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On September 15 , 2014 , it was announced that 20th Century Fox had bought the film rights to Alexandra Bracken 's young adult novel The Darkest Minds , the first book in her The Darkest Minds series .
Shawn Levy would produce the film along with Dan Levine and Dan Cohen through his 21 Laps Entertainment , while the television writer Chad Hodge was hired to write the adaptation .
On July 12 , 2016 , it was reported that animation director Jennifer Yuh Nelson had been hired to direct the film , and it would be her first live - action project .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
On September 26 , 2016 , Amandla Stenberg joined the film to play the lead role of Ruby Daly , a 15-year - old girl who runs away from her government camp and joins a group of teens .
On January 17 , 2017 , it was reported that newcomer Harris Dickinson had signed on to play Liam , who also develops superpowers surviving the disease .
In February 2017 , Miya Cech was cast in her debut film to play Zu , and Skylan Brooks was cast in the film to play Chubs .
In March 2017 , Mandy Moore was cast to play Cate , a doctor and member of an organization who is fighting against the government , and Patrick Gibson was cast to play Clancy Gray , the president 's handsome son , whose posters are all over the camp for being " cured " of his powers .
He also has the power of seeing into people 's minds .
Gwendoline Christie was also cast in the film to play a bounty hunter of teens who escape from the camp .
In April 2017 , Golden Brooks joined the film to play the mother of Daly .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography on the film began in April 2017 in Atlanta , Georgia .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The Darkest Minds has grossed $ 12.7 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 28.4 million in other territories , for a total worldwide gross of $ 41.1 million , against a production budget of $ 34 million .
In the United States and Canada , The Darkest Minds was released on August 3 , 2018 , alongside Christopher Robin , The Spy Who Dumped Me and , and was originally projected to gross around $ 10 million from 3,127 theaters in its opening weekend .
However after grossing $ 2.3 million on its first day , including $ 550,000 from Thursday night previews , weekend estimates were lowered to $ 6 million .
It went on to debut $ 5.8 million , finishing eighth at the box office and marking the 11th worst opening for a film playing in over 3,000 theaters .
It dropped 64 % to $ 2.1 million in its second weekend , finishing 12th .
In its third weekend , the film grossed $ 255,173 and was pulled from 2,679 theaters ( 85.6 % , 3,127 to 448 ) , marking the largest third - weekend theater drop in history , beating Live by Nights record of 2,659 .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 17 % based on 117 reviews , with an average rating of 4.1/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " The Darkest Minds does little to differentiate itself in a crowded field of YA adaptations , leaving all but the least demanding viewers feeling dystopian déjà vu . "
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 39 out of 100 , based on reviews from 28 critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B " on an A+ to F scale .
A.A. Dowd of The A.V. Club called the film " a formulaic hodgepodge of secondhand plot points " and " an insult to its target demographic " of teen moviegoers .
William Bibbiani of TheWrap praised the film and the cast , but concedes " it 's not quite thrilling enough [ ... ]
so it plays a bit more like a manifesto than a sci - fi thriller .
" Monica Castillo of RogerEbert.com wrote that while the film has a " promising start " , it " ultimately does n't quite deliver . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS