ACKLEY BRIDGE Ackley Bridge is a British television drama series set in a multicultural academy school of the same name , broadcast on Channel 4 from 7 June 2017 .
The school is set in the fictional Yorkshire mill town of Ackley Bridge .
A second series of twelve episodes was announced on 30 June 2017 , broadcasting from 5 June 2018 .
A third series of eight episodes was confirmed on 21 August 2018 and will air in 2019 .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
In early 2017 , Channel 4 announced The ABC , a new six - part school drama .
The series follows the merger of two schools in a segregated British and Pakistani community due to budget cuts , exploring " the turbulent school experience , covering the challenges of prejudice and cultural issues in the school environment , as well as the humour , relationships and conflict had by the pupils , teachers and parents . "
St Catherine 's Catholic High School in Halifax is used as Ackley Bridge College .
The show was later renamed Ackley Bridge .
Following the Manchester Arena bombing , the first episode was re - edited prior to airing as there were scenes showing " a troubled student strap a fake bomb to himself in order to disrupt the merging of a predominantly white and a predominantly Asian school . "
A spokesperson said " In light of the tragic events in Manchester , the first episode of forthcoming drama series Ackley Bridge is being re - edited . "
Ahead of the first series premiere , additional content from the show has been shared on social media for " high school age characters to tell their stories in the way young people are " to introduce the characters .
Further episodes will " be subsidised with additional videos that will help build the world outside of the allocated TV broadcast . "
CAST MAIN GUEST AND RECURRING
* Rita May as Julie " Nana " Booth * Narinder Samra as Iqbal Paracha
* Steve Jackson as Kevin Wilson * Vicky Entwistle as Sandra Turner
* Kimberley Walsh as Claire Butterworth EPISODES SERIES
OVERVIEW
Section::::Episodes .
Section::::Series overview .
SERIES 1 ( 2017 )
SERIES 2 ( 2018 )
SERIES 3 ( 2019 )
Section::::Series 3 ( 2019 ) .
In August 2018 , a third series was confirmed , due to air in 2019 .
There are set to be 8 episodes .
PRODUCTION AND CASTING Section::::Production and casting .
The cast , main and supporting , are a mix of experienced and trained actors , as well as street cast actors .
Former EastEnders actors Jo Joyner and Paul Nicholls received the parts of married couple Mandy Carter , the headteacher of Ackley Bridge College and Steve Bell , a PE teacher .
Joyner describes Mandy as " career driven " , who has " worked so hard over the years to get to the level she 's at .
Joyner adds she likes the fact her character is not interested in having children .
Despite her character being " organised and driven in her business life [ ... ] she 's not at all organised or in control at home . "
Amy - Leigh Hickman , best known for playing Carmen Howle in Tracy Beaker Returns and The Dumping Ground , plays Nasreen Paracha , daughter of Kaneez , who she describes as a " quieter and tamer " student , as well as " intelligent " , but " ballsy .
" She felt comfortable acting scenes with Poppy Lee Friar , who plays best friend Missy , due to having a friendship in real life .
Friar says she loves portraying Missy , who she describes as " sassy , saucy and a survivor . "
Television newcomers Nazmeen Kausar Hussain and Esa Ashraf play Razia and Saleem Paracha , Kaneez 's two other children .
Maariah Hussain and Sam Bottomley , both students at Yorkshire School of Acting in Bradford , were cast as Alya Nawaz and Jordan Wilson respectively .
Hussain described her character as " super intelligent , fiercely righteous , and a bit of a mean girl " , who is also " insecure as any teenage girl " but " has ambitions to run her own business , like her father , but struggles to make him see she 's capable of it . "
Jordan is billed as " badly behaved and not fazed by getting into trouble " , however " he 's bright and a talented artist , but thinks school is pointless . "
Matt Zina , principal of Hussain and Bottomley 's acting school said Ackley Bridge is Hussain 's first role and " she has taken to it like a duck to water .
She has loved being part of a major TV series and was excited to be working with some of the big - name actors involved " and he called Bottomley an " exciting young actor .
"
Cody Ryan got the part of Hayley Booth through an acting workshop at her school , Buttershaw Business and Enterprise College , which was run by Beverley Keogh casting agency .
Students from Trinity Academy , North Halifax Grammar School , The Crossley Heath School and Calderdale College feature in the series .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Since the show 's announcement , Ackley Bridge has been compared to BBC 's long - running school drama , Waterloo Road , with Duncan Lindsay from Metro opining that " Channel 4 have been crying out for a solid drama to fit into the early night slot " and that there has been a lack of a " solid school based drama " , stating that Ackley Bridge " follows the trials and tribulations of an academy which has merged two different communities together .
" The series has also been compared to BBC 's other long - running school drama series , Grange Hill , as Michael Hogan from The Guardian stated " it could be described as Grange Hill with a mobile phone and a northern accent . "
Sam Wollaston from The Guardian said the character of Jordan Wilson , played by Sam Bottomly , " is the best character at Ackley Bridge – smart , offensive to everyone , the school wind - up merchant , who also represents a pessimistic but realistic view that such attempts at integration are futile . "
He added that the " teachers are n't a whole lot better than they kids " due to the situations , such as the love triangle between Mandy Carter , Steve Bell and Sadiq Nawaz , played by Jo Joyner , Paul Nicholls and Adil Ray respectively and Steve hitting Jordan , but said it " was a teeny bit justified . "
He described Liz White 's character , Emma Keane , as " a hippy - dippy flippy - floppy backpacker .
"
The show has also been thought of as a Waterloo Road and Shameless mix and the social media aspect is seen as " savvy . "
He also added that the show raised questions " about whether total integration is possible , even necessary , both in school and out of school .
That side of things is handled carefully and sensitively .
Real issues are n't avoided , cultural differences are n't denied ; at the same time , obvious and boring stereotypes are avoided .
If that makes it sound worthy , it really is n't .
It 's pleasingly loud and mischievous .
Well , it 's school , of course it is .
As well as boobs , Ackley Bridge has balls .
And a heart . "
Poppy Lee Friar and Cody Ryan received praise from viewers in the fourth episode of series one , where the episode revolved around Missy dealing with the death of Julia Booth , played by Rita May , which leads to Hayley being placed in care .
Viewers also praised scenes of Lila Sharif , played by Anneika Rose , coming out as lesbian to her students .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS