LIST OF THE THUNDERMANS CHARACTERS
The Thundermans is an American comedy television series created by Jed Spingarn that aired on Nickelodeon from October 14 , 2013 to May 25 , 2018 .
The series stars Kira Kosarin , Jack Griffo , Addison Riecke , Diego Velazquez , Chris Tallman , Rosa Blasi , and Maya Le Clark , and features the voice of Dana Snyder as Dr. Colosso .
MAIN PHOEBE THUNDERMAN Section::::Main .
Section::::Phoebe Thunderman .
( Kira Kosarin ) is a superheroine twin to Max and older sister to Billy , Nora , and Chloe .
Her superhero alias is Thunder Girl .
She is very responsible , a straight A student , and tries to play by the " no powers " rule .
She has telekinesis , freeze breath , and heat breath .
In " Thundersense " , Phoebe develops a new ability called Thundersense , which warns her if she and others are in danger .
Since the beginning of season 3 , Phoebe has been training to become a superhero and officially became the superhero , Thunder Girl in the special " Thundermans : Secret Revealed " .
However , in " Come What Mayhem , " during an attempt to stop one of Max 's former pranks from going off , Phoebe accidentally absorbed Dark Mayhem 's powers and turned evil .
At the beginning of the series , Phoebe is 14 years old .
MAX THUNDERMAN Section::::Max Thunderman .
( portrayed by Jack Griffo ) is also one of the main characters .
He is the antagonist - turned - anti - hero , being the twin brother Phoebe and older brother to Billy , Nora , and Chloe .
Despite being raised within a family of superheroes , Max originally aspired to become supervillain for the first three seasons .
In the Season 3 finale , he finally had a change of heart and made a life - changing decision to abandon the dark side and become a fighter for justice , using his powers and high - tech gadgets for the greater good .
The fourth and final season focuses on Max readjusting to his new daily life as a superhero instead of an evil - doer , as he tackles challenges working with Phoebe in Z - Force training , which jeopardizes his friendship with Dr. Colosso .
His basement bedroom serves as his secret lair , filled with high - tech gadgets and posters of The Villain League ( especially Dark Mayhem ) .
As of the fourth and final season , his lair now has posters of the Z - Force , and other superhero posters .
His lair is accessible through a slide leading to his bed underneath a tea table next to the couch in the living room and it is also where he keeps his best friend and mentor , Dr. Colosso , a supervillain Thunder Man turned into a rabbit .
Max has the same superpowers as Phoebe : telekinesis , ice breath , and heat breath .
, and like his twin sister , he is 14 at the beginning of the series .
NORA THUNDERMAN Section::::Nora Thunderman .
Nora Thunderman ( Addison Riecke ) is the second youngest of the Thunderman family and a mischievous little sister to Phoebe , Max , and Billy and older sister to Chloe .
Her superpower is laser vision .
She can easily recruit Billy into any scheme of hers , as she scares him a bit .
BILLY THUNDERMAN Section::::Billy Thunderman .
Billy Thunderman ( ) is the third - born Thunderman child .
He is an energetic little brother to Phoebe and Max and older brother to Nora and Chloe .
His superpower is super - speed .
In one episode , it was revealed that Barb gave birth to Billy in the air while her husband was transporting her to a hospital , implying that Billy likely hit his head after birth , which is probably why he is sometimes unintelligent .
HANK THUNDERMAN
Section::::Hank Thunderman .
Hank Thunderman ( Chris Tallman ) is the husband to Barb and father to Phoebe , Max , Billy , Nora , and Chloe .
His superhero alias is Thunder Man .
His superpowers are super - strength and flight .
Hank has now half - unwillingly retired as a superhero in order to give his kids a stable and normal home .
He still uses his powers to fly to places around the world .
BARB THUNDERMAN Section::::Barb Thunderman .
Barb Thunderman ( Rosa Blasi ) is the wife to Hank and mother to Phoebe , Max , Billy , Nora , and Chloe .
Her superhero alias is Electress .
Barb 's superpower is controlling electricity and lightning .
Unlike her husband , she is completely okay with leaving her superheroine life behind .
Barb does , however , agree with Hank that Max is going through a supervillain " phase " that needs to end quickly .
CHLOE THUNDERMAN Section::::Chloe Thunderman .
Chloe Thunderman ( Maya Le Clark ) is the youngest Thunderman child and baby sister to Phoebe , Max , Billy , and Nora .
Barb gave birth to her in " A Hero Is Born " .
Chloe 's babyhood superpower was making bubbles , and her permanent superpower is teleportation .
While Chloe was a recurring character in season three , she was promoted to the main cast in season 4 .
RECURRING CHERRY Section::::Recurring .
Section::::Cherry .
Cherry Seinfeld ( Audrey Whitby ) is Phoebe 's best friend who is bubbly , tech - savvy and dimwitted .
She was originally unaware of the family 's superpowers , learning about them in "
A Hero Is Born " .
DR .
COLOSSO Section::::Dr .
Colosso .
Dr. Colosso ( voiced by Dana Snyder ) is one of the world 's greatest villains of the Villain League and Hank 's former nemesis until Hank transformed him into a rabbit while still Thunder Man .
He is kept in Max 's bedroom .
It is shown that Dr. Colosso likes Max very much .
In " A Hero Is Born " , Dr. Colosso was temporarily turned back to his human form so he could go get an award which was actually a plot by fellow villains King Crab , Lady Web , and Scalestro to get him kicked out due to being inactive in villainy .
Though the three Villain League members were unaware about him having been trapped in rabbit form all this time .
Other times when Dr. Colosso was turned human was when Phoebe had him pose as her uncle on family game night and when he stole the animalizer in a plot to disrupt Hank and Barb 's wedding vow renewal similar to when he disrupted their first wedding .
Colosso also appears in a dream sequence in " The Wonderful Wizard of Quads " , the final episode of the third season of Nicky , Ricky , Dicky & Dawn , parodying the 1939 film The Wizard of Oz .
His puppet is performed by Stephen , Edward , & Charles Chiodo where they were later assisted by Kevin Carlson .
COUSIN BLOBBIN Section::::Cousin Blobbin .
Cousin Blobbin ( Harvey Guillen ) is the sidekick of Barb 's deceased millionaire Uncle Wilfred , who operated as the All American Blob , and the cousin of the Thunderman children .
In his will , Wilfred left his enormous fortune and mansion for Blobbin .
Blobbin is very sensitive , but at the same time is extremely devoted to family and usually helps the Thundermans in whatever way he can .
MRS .
WONG Section::::Mrs .
Wong .
Mrs. Wong ( Helen Hong ) is the aunt of Darcy and the owner of a pizza restaurant who is never nice to anyone , especially to the Thundermans .
In her debut , Phoebe and Max take up jobs in her restaurant , but end up getting fired after they inadvertently destroy her kitchen , thus igniting her contempt for the twins and their family .
In " Thundermans : Secret Revealed " , she exposes the Thundermans to the people in Hiddenville upon figuring out .
It is revealed in this episode that her first name is ' Olympia ' .
In " Thundermans : Banished " , her pizza restaurant is accidentally destroyed by Phoebe and Max 's attempts to stop an explosion causing Super President Kickbutt to relocate the Thundermans to Antarctica and reassign their post to Falcon Man 's family .
She later rebuilt it only for Candi Falconman to crash through her roof .
She is among the Hiddenville residents to be fooled by Super President Kickbutt 's fake power - removal on the Thundermans .
OYSTER Section::::Oyster .
Oyster ( Tanner Stine ) is a guitarist boy who is in Max 's new band as of " Pheebs Will Rock You " .
Phoebe initially had a crush on him until she learned that he is somewhat crazy .
He considers guitars alive female beings , following their " decisions " , talking to them and even writing songs for them .
GIDEON Section::::Gideon .
Gideon ( Kenny Ridwan ) is a boy in Max 's band .
He has feelings toward Max 's mom , which leaves everyone grossed out , and later begins to develop feelings toward Phoebe .
WOLFGANG Section::::Wolfgang .
Wolfgang ( Jake Borelli ) is a drum player of Max 's band .
He is from Germany and came to Hiddenville for a school cultural exchange project .
He speaks very little English , with a strong German accent , and often exclaims " Wolfgang ! " when he is excited , happy or surprised .
MADISON Section::::Madison .
Madison ( Brooke Sorenson ) is a cheerleader at Hiddenville High .
She is the head of the cheerleading squad and often calls for cheer chats with the other cheerleaders .
SARAH Section::::Sarah .
Sarah ( Keely Marshall ) is a girl who also has an obsessive crush on Max .
PRINCIPAL BRADFORD Section::::Principal Bradford .
Principal Tad Bradford ( Jeff Meacham ) is Hiddenville High 's principal .
He is shown to hate his job , have a sad life , and dislike the Thunderman family because of Max 's pranks .
In " 21 Dump Street , " it is revealed that Principal Bradford lives at school where he has a reclining bed behind some lockers .
It 's also revealed that he has n't gotten over his first break - up , which is the reason for his sad and depressing life .
MADDY Section::::Maddy .
Maddy ( Gabrielle Elyse ) is a member of Madison 's cheerleading squad who is one of Phoebe 's friends .
LINK Section::::Link .
Link Evilman ( Barrett Carnahan ) is Phoebe 's boyfriend who is the son of Hank 's former supervillain nemesis , Evilman .
Eventually their relationship ends when Link begins to use his powers as a hero but ends up assigned in Hong Kong by the Hero League .
His superpower is elasticity .
SUPER PRESIDENT KICKBUTT Section::::Super President Kickbutt .
Super President Kickbutt ( Daniele Gaither ) is the president of the Hero League .
She alerts the Thundermans of any supervillains in the area and also presents superheroes that graduated from the Hero League Academy their capes .
DARK MAYHEM Section::::Dark Mayhem .
Dark Mayhem ( performed by Omid Zader , voiced by Jamieson Price ) is a full - costumed and the world 's most dangerous villain who is an elite member of the Villain League .
He clearly parodies Darth Vader and debuted as an Uncle Sam - like poster in Max ' room with " I want you !
" written on .
In Season 3 he started contacting Max via videochat to test him and was later explained to be responsible for the origin of Evilman ( it should be noticed that the Season 3 depiction was thought to be a comedical character more than the evil villain originally described ) .
Max idolized him up to " Thundermans :
Secrets Revealed " where he , Fairy Pinch - ess , Strongdor , and Son of Scalestro plan to have Max use a special orb to drain Thundergirl 's powers .
He was defeated by Phoebe and Max , who drained Dark Mayhem of his powers , and thrown in prison .
In " Thunder in Paradise " , Dark Mayhem is shown incarcerated in Metroburg Superjail with Strongdor as his cellmate much to Dark Mayhem 's annoyance .
Phoebe visits Dark Mayhem to consult him into getting rid of his abilities after the incident in " Come What Mayhem " .
Dark Mayhem tells her that she ca n't and to embrace him to take over the world while directing her to where they can find his former robot sidekick Destructo .
Phoebe states that she will be more evil than him .
After Phoebe is freed from Dark Mayhem 's powers , Hank throws Destructo 's head which lands in Dark Mayhem 's cell at the time he was playing checkers with Strongdor .
Dark Mayhem then grunts in dismay as Destructo 's head and Strongdor argue over who gets the top bunk .
ALLISON Section::::Allison .
Allison ( Ryan Newman ) is Hiddenville High 's do - gooder who invests in every single social cause .
She is Max 's girlfriend .
In " 21 Dump Street , " Allison breaks up with Max .
GRANDMA WONG
Section::::Grandma Wong .
A former owner of Splatburger and Mrs. Wong 's grandmother .
She is no kinder than Mrs. Wong and is in love with general Bradford .
GENERAL BRADFORD Section::::General Bradford .
A former general of Hiddenville
he is as much of a jerk as principal Bradford and is in love with Grandma Wong .
SEE ALSO
* List of The Thundermans episodes REFERENCES GENERAL
REFERENCES
*
The episodes of The Thundermans that have aired are the source of most of the information in this article .