TOKIO MYERS Torville Jones ( born 6 April 1984 ) , better known by his stage name Tokio Myers , is a pianist and music producer born in London .
He won reality show Britain 's Got Talent in 2017 playing Debussy 's " Clair de lune " , which turned into Ed Sheeran 's song " Bloodstream " ; Rihanna 's " Diamonds " in semi - final 3 ; and in the final , Hans Zimmer 's Interstellar theme soundtrack and Rag'n'Bone Man 's hit " Human " .
After winning Britain 's Got Talent in 2017 , Myers released many of his independent releases and became a major internet sensation .
In October 2017 , he announced his debut single , " Bloodstream " , along with his debut album Our Generation .
The single is a studio rendition of his audition performance on Britain 's Got Talent .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Torville Jones was born on 6 April 1984 , and is of West Indian and British descent .
Growing up , he saw his headmaster , Philip Lawrence , stabbed to death outside the gates of St George 's Catholic School in north London .
Tokio was 11 at the time and was led to safety inside the building by his music teacher .
Myers went on to study with a full scholarship at the Royal College of Music .
CAREER
Section::::Career .
Myers has previously supported Kanye West , The Police and Amy Winehouse when he toured with producer Mr Hudson 's band Mr Hudson and the Library .
Myers also supported Lianne La Havas on her 2016 European Tour .
He used synths and a sample pad as part of his performances , fusing classical roots with dance and pop genres .
He was signed to a publishing deal with BMG .
In June 2017 , Myers featured in and co - produced a charity single of " Bridge over Troubled Water " to raise money for those impacted by the Grenfell Tower fire , which happened in North Kensington on 14 June 2017 .
On 13 October 2017 , he released his official debut single , entitled " Bloodstream " , which is his studio rendition of his audition performance at Britain 's Got Talent .
It was also announced as being the lead single from his debut album , entitled Our Generation , which being released in November 2017 .
On 5 November 2017 , Myers performed as a guest on The X Factor , performing " Angel " , and he returned in the final , to duet with Kevin Davy White performing " Fastlove , Pt . 1 " by George Michael .
DISCOGRAPHY STUDIO ALBUMS UK !
scope="row "
Our Generation * Released : 17 November 2017
* Label : Syco * Formats : CD , digital download 4 * BPI :
Silver SINGLES
AS
LEAD ARTIST UK !
scope="row " " Bloodstream " ! scope="row " " Baltimore " ! scope="row " " Angel " ! scope="row
" " Children " AS
FEATURED ARTIST UK !
scope="row " " Bridge over Troubled Water " REMIXES * Clean Bandit - "
I Miss You " REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website