NEW ZEALAND –
EUROPEAN UNION RELATIONS New Zealand and the European Union ( EU ) have solid relations and increasingly see eye - to - eye on international issues .
The EU - New Zealand relations are founded on a Joint Declaration on Relations and Cooperation , first agreed in 2007 .
It covers not just economic relations , but broader political issues and cooperation .
The New Zealand Government maintains a delegation to the EU at its embassy in Brussels .
A Delegation of the European Union is located in Wellington .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Since July 2012 , New Zealand and the EU have been in negotiations for a first legally binding overarching political treaty , governing their overall relationship .
Negotiations of this treaty - the Partnership Agreement on Relations and Cooperation ( PARC ) – have been concluded and the text was initialled in March 2015 .
Formal signing is foreseen in second half of 2016 .
The first political statement of cooperation between the EU and New Zealand dates back to 1999 , with signing of the Joint Declaration on Relations between the European Union and New Zealand .
This has been replaced in 2007 by the Joint Declaration on Relations and Cooperation , an updated political declaration which governs and directs the activity between the two partners .
The Declaration sets out a detailed action programme for the EU and New Zealand in such areas as global and regional security , counter - terrorism and human rights , development and economic cooperation , trade , climate change as well as science and technology .
The EU and New Zealand have also negotiated a number of sectoral agreements designed to facilitate access to each other 's markets and reduce exporters ' costs .
Notable examples include agreements on veterinary standards , horizontal air transport services , and on mutual recognition of standards and certification .
Senior officials ' consultations on trade , agriculture , fisheries and science & technology take place every year alternating between Brussels and Wellington .
Consultations and information exchanges also take place in areas such as climate change , development assistance and humanitarian aid .
In October 2015 , during Prime Minister John Key 's visit to Brussels , European Union Council President Donald Tusk and European Commission President Jean - Claude Juncker announced with Prime Minister Key the launching of a process towards an EU - New Zealand Free Trade Agreement .
Work is currently under way to prepare the negotiations .
https://eeas.europa.eu/delegations/new-zealand/1600/new-zealand-and-eu_en
TRADE Section::::Trade .
The EU is New Zealand 's second largest trading partner , after Australia , and New Zealand is the EU 's 49th .
New Zealand 's exports is dominated by agricultural goods .
The stock of EU foreign direct investment in New Zealand is € 9.8bn and the stock of New Zealand 's investment in the EU is € 4.5bn .
The EU and New Zealand have both expressed interest in negotiating a free trade agreement between the two .
The EU will decide in May 2018 whether to officially start trade negotiations . !
colspan=5 EU – New Zealand trade !
Direction of trade !
Goods !
Services SEE ALSO * Foreign relations of New Zealand
* Foreign relations of the European Union REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * New Zealand mission to the EU * EU mission to New Zealand * European Union – New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade