TURTLES ALL THE WAY DOWN ( NOVEL )
Turtles
All the Way Down is a young adult novel written by American author John Green , published on October 10 , 2017 by Dutton Books .
It is his fifth solo novel , and his seventh overall .
Its publication was announced during VidCon 2017 , the online video conference co - founded by Green and his brother Hank .
It is his first published work since his 2012 novel The Fault in Our Stars . BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
The story centers on 16-year - old Aza Holmes , a high school student living with multiple anxiety disorders , and her search for a fugitive billionaire .
The only other details of the plot revealed to the public before release were that it was to contain , either literally or figuratively , a tuatara , Star Wars fanfiction , an unexpected reunion , friendship and values of life .
Speaking about the novel , Green stated : " This is my first attempt to write directly about the kind of mental illness that has affected my life since childhood , so while the story is fictional , it is also quite personal . "
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
Aza Holmes is a 16-year - old high school student living in Indianapolis who struggles with OCD , often manifest as a fear of the human microbiome .
Constantly worried about infection , particularly by C. diff , she repeatedly opens a never - fully - healed callus on her finger in an effort to drain out what she believes are pathogens .
Throughout the book , Aza has two close friends : Mychal Turner , an aspiring artist , and her best friend Daisy Ramirez , who writes Star Wars fan - fiction .
One day at school Daisy discovers that Russell Pickett , a billionaire construction magnate and the father of one of Aza 's old friends , Davis Pickett , has gone missing in the wake of fraud investigations .
Tempted by the reward of $ 100,000 for information leading to Pickett 's arrest , Daisy takes Aza on a search for the missing billionaire .
After canoeing across the White River , and sneaking onto the Pickett property , they are caught by the security guard , who brings them to meet Davis .
After the meeting , Davis and Aza begin a relationship .
In an attempt to persuade the two girls to stop pursuing the elder Pickett , Davis gives Aza $ 100,000 taken from his father 's various stashes around the guest house , which she splits with Daisy .
At the same time , Daisy becomes romantically involved with Mychal .
As time passes , Aza comes to believe that she can not overcome her anxiety , preventing her from ever having a normal relationship with Davis .
She finds numerous blog posts written by him about his feelings on both his father 's disappearance and his relationship with her .
Aza reads Daisy 's fan - fiction for the first time , finding that Daisy had been using it as a vent for her frustrations with Aza .
Their friendship briefly deteriorates , culminating in a heated argument while Aza is driving that results in a car accident .
Aza spends several weeks recovering in the hospital .
The two rekindle their friendship once she is healed .
At an art exhibition inside an unfinished drainage tunnel system off of Pogue 's Run ( that Pickett 's company was responsible for ) , Aza and Daisy go exploring on their own , where they finally solve the mystery and realize that Pickett had run to the very place they were .
After noticing a bad smell emanating from the area , they suspect that the billionaire had already died .
Aza tells Davis of their discovery .
He places an anonymous tip to the police , who find the body .
Given the loss of their parents and home ( their mother had died years prior ) , added with the fact that their father had left his entire fortune to his pet tuatara , Davis and his younger brother Noah decide to relocate to Colorado , where Noah would attend a boarding school .
As Davis and Aza say their goodbyes , she reflects on the open possibilities of her future .
PUBLICATION HISTORY Section::::Publication history .
A section of the novel was read aloud by Green during the Project for Awesome live stream in December 2016 .
In order to protect the book 's copyright , this section of the live stream was not archived and is no longer available online .
In the months leading up to the novel 's announcement , Green left various clues in his weekly vlogbrothers videos , whereupon some members of Nerdfighteria worked together to solve these hints and reveal more information about the book .
In September , Green posted a video of himself narrating the first chapter of the novel on his channel ' vlogbrothers ' .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Within hours of the novel 's announcement , press outlets including The Washington Post , Buzzfeed , Bustle , Publishers Weekly , Mashable , MTV , and Entertainment Weekly published press releases echoing the announcement , signaling a high level of anticipation .
The book debuted to positive reviews .
The New York Times praised it as " surprising and moving " and wrote that " one need n't be suffering like Aza to identify with it .
One need only be human .
"
Many reviewers noted Green 's talent for keen observation , sharpened more in this case by Green 's own struggles with OCD , the mental illness depicted in the novel .
Several reviewers referenced a dismissive perception of Green 's now very popular oeuvre as " sad teen books " , which emerged since the popularity of The Fault in Our Stars , but praised Turtles All the Way Down as truthful and authentic enough to transcend these imagined drawbacks .
" It often dwells in cliché , but only as pop songs and epic poems do , mining the universal to create something that speaks to the familiar rhythms of the heart , " wrote Matt Haig of The Guardian , " It might just be a new modern classic .
"
FILM ADAPTATION Section::::Film adaptation .
In December 2017 , Green announced that a film adaptation was in development .
It was optioned by Fox 2000 and would be produced by Temple Hill Productions , the same team that made The Fault in Our Stars and Paper Towns adaptions .
In May 2018 , Green confirmed that Isaac Aptaker and Elizabeth Berger , the co - showrunners of the NBC series This Is Us and the screenwriters of Love , Simon , would be adapting the novel .
SEE ALSO
* The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night - Time REFERENCES