IN MY FEELINGS
" In My Feelings " is a song by Canadian musician Drake from his fifth studio album Scorpion ( 2018 ) .
It was released to rhythmic and contemporary hit radio on July 10 , 2018 , as the album 's fifth single .
The song features additional vocals by the City Girls , though they are not credited on the official version .
The song topped the Billboard Hot 100 chart for ten weeks and broke several records .
COMPOSITION AND SAMPLES Section::::Composition and samples .
" In My Feelings " is a bounce track , similar to Drake 's previous single " Nice for What " .
Upon its release , several outlets reported that the song and " Kiki " was about Keshia Chanté , Drake 's first girlfriend and childhood friend from Toronto .
It was also reported that " KB " was K'yanna Barber , a resident of Oakland , California .
Drake also makes references to Jennifer Lopez ( " Jenny " ) , who he briefly dated in 2016 , and Quality Control duo City Girls , made up of members Yung Miami ( " Resha " ) and JT .
The City Girls also provide uncredited vocals .
The track samples " Smoking Gun ( Acapella Version ) " by Magnolia Shorty for the breakdown .
" Lollipop " by Lil Wayne is also sampled and the track ends with audio from the episode " Champagne Papi " from the television series Atlanta .
The song was later slightly altered and re - uploaded to streaming sites with additional sampled vocals from Lil Wayne .
RELEASE AND RECEPTION Section::::Release and reception .
The song inspired an Internet meme dance challenge known as the " Kiki Challenge " , " In My Feelings Challenge " or " DoTheShiggy " , the latter being a reference to the comedian Shiggy , who posted a video on his Instagram account of him dancing to the song ; this video was credited for inspiring the challenge .
The dance challenge is to walk outside of moving vehicles ( ghost riding ) and dance in oncoming traffic .
Originating in the US , the challenge later spread to other parts of the world where in some countries it caused controversy and public concern .
The challenge is banned in roads of EDSA and other public roads in the Philippines .
The Fader deemed the bounce track as the highlight of the double album , with writer Ben Dandrige - Lemco saying , " it takes a whole 20 songs to get to the best part of the album , ' In My Feelings ' " .
The Hollywood Reporters Jonny Coleman felt that the song , along with " Nice for What " , " might be two of the most enduring tracks [ in the album ] " .
Andy Hutchins of Time called the song " a disastrous misunderstanding of New Orleans bounce . "
Billboard named " In My Feelings " the 42nd - best song of 2018 .
COMMERCIAL PERFORMANCE Section::::Commercial performance .
In the Billboard magazine issue dated July 14 , 2018 , " In My Feelings " debuted at number six on the Billboard Hot 100 , one of seven top 10 entries by Drake that week .
The following week , partly due to the rising popularity of the dance challenge associated with the song , it ascended to the top spot of the chart , becoming Drake 's sixth number - one single on the chart .
On the issue dated July 28 , 2018 , " In My Feelings " broke the streaming record for the most streams in a single week with 116.2 million streams , and retained the top spot on the chart .
It remained on top for ten consecutive weeks until it was replaced on the chart issue dated September 29 , 2018 by " Girls Like You " by Maroon 5 featuring
Cardi B. It ultimately remained in the top ten for 14 weeks .
It also reached number one on the Canadian Hot 100 and the UK Singles Chart .
In the UK , it did not enter the charts on the first week due to chart rules , but the next week , due to the popularity of the dance challenge , it entered at number four .
A week later , it rose to number one .
"
In My Feelings " spent four weeks at the top of the chart , before being replaced by " Shotgun " .
The success of " In My Feelings " made Drake the record holder for most number one hits among rappers in the history of the Hot 100 chart .
MUSIC VIDEO Section::::Music video .
The song 's music video was shot on July 23 , 2018 in New Orleans and was directed by Karena Evans , whom Drake previously worked with on the videos for " God 's Plan " , " Nice for What " , and
" I 'm Upset " earlier in the year .
The song 's music video was released on August 2 , 2018 , on Drake 's YouTube channel .
" KeKe " is played by La La Anthony while her mother is played by Phylicia Rashad .
The video takes place in New Orleans and shows people dancing to the song , including Yung Miami of the City Girls and bounce music legend Big Freedia .
Comedian Shiggy , who has been credited with inventing the viral " In My Feelings Challenge " , makes a cameo as a production assistant as well as a dancer in the video .
At the end of the music video , a small montage of celebrities and internet influencers participating in the " In My Feelings Challenge " is displayed .
A few of these people include Will Smith , DJ Khaled , Ciara , Steve Aoki , Odell Beckham Jr. , Dua Lipa , Millie Bobby Brown , Liza Koshy , Noah Schnapp , Ryan Seacrest , Shay Mitchell , Bobby Berk , Tan France , Karamo Brown , Antoni Porowski , Jonathan Van Ness , and J - Hope ( BTS ) .
As of November 2018 , the music video on YouTube has amassed more than 150 million views .
USAGE IN MEDIA Section::::Usage in media .
" In My Feelings " is featured in the video .
PERSONNEL Section::::Personnel .
Credits adapted from the album 's liner notes and Tidal .
* Noah " 40 " Shebib – production , recording * Noel " Gadget " Campbell – mixing
* Harley Arsenault – mixing assistance , recording assistance
* Greg Moffet – mixing assistance , recording assistance
* Ronald Moonoo – mixing assistance
* Blaqnmild – production
* TrapMoneyBenny – production CHARTS WEEKLY CHARTS
Section::::Charts .
Section::::Weekly charts . ! scope="col " Chart ( 2018 ) ! scope="col " Peak position ! scope="row " Argentina ( Argentina Hot 100 ) ! scope="row " Argentina Anglo ( Monitor Latino ) ! scope="row " Australia Urban ( ARIA ) ! scope="row " Brazil ( Brasil Hot 100 Airplay ) ! scope="row "
Brazil Streaming ( Pro - Música ) ! scope="row " Colombia ( National Report ) ! scope="row " Greece International Digital ( IFPI ) ! scope="row " Ireland ( IRMA ) !
scope="row " Lebanon ( Lebanese Top 20 ) ! scope="row " Malaysia ( RIM ) ! scope="row " Mexico ( AMPROFON ) ! scope="row " Mexico Airplay ( Billboard ) ! scope="row " Romania ( Airplay 100 ) ! scope="row " Singapore ( RIAS ) !
scope="row " Spain ( PROMUSICAE ) YEAR - END CHARTS Section::::Year - end charts .
!
scope="col " Chart ( 2018 ) ! scope="col " Position !
scope="row " Canada ( Canadian Hot 100 ) ! scope="row " New Zealand ( Recorded Music NZ ) ! scope="row " US Billboard Hot 100 ! scope="row " US Hot R&B / Hip - Hop Songs ( Billboard ) ! scope="row " US Mainstream Top 40
( Billboard )
CERTIFICATIONS
RELEASE HISTORY Section::::Release history . !
Region !
Date !
Format !
Label(s ) !
scope="row " rowspan="2 " United States ! scope="row
" United Kingdom !
scope="row"Italy SEE
ALSO
* List of number - one singles of 2018
( Australia ) * List of number - one digital tracks of 2018
( Australia ) * List of number - one urban singles of 2018
( Australia ) * List of Canadian Hot 100 number - one singles of 2018
* List of number - one digital songs of 2018
( Canada ) * List of number - one hits of 2018
( Denmark ) * List of number - one songs of 2018
( Lebanon ) * List of number - one songs of 2018 ( Malaysia ) * List of Dutch Top 40 number - one singles of 2018
* List of number - one singles from the 2010s ( New Zealand )
* List of number - one singles of 2018 ( Portugal ) * List of number - one songs of 2018
( Singapore ) * List of number - one singles of the 2010s
( Sweden ) * List of UK Singles Chart number ones of the 2010s
* List of UK R&B Singles Chart number ones of 2018
* List of Billboard Hot 100 number - one singles of 2018
* List of Billboard Rhythmic number - one songs of the 2010s
* List of number - one Billboard Streaming Songs of 2018
* List of number - one digital songs of 2018 ( U.S. )
* List of number - one R&B / hip - hop songs of 2018 ( U.S. ) REFERENCES