ALWAYS AND FOREVER , LARA JEAN
Always and Forever , Lara Jean is a 2017 young adult romance novel by American author Jenny Han , first published by Simon & Schuster and released on May 2 , 2017 .
It is the third and final installment of the To All the Boys I 've Loved Before series , following To All the Boys I 've Loved Before , released on April 15 , 2014 , and P.S.
I Still Love You , released on May 26 , 2015 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Now in her final year of high school , Lara Jean Song Covey is looking forward to attending school with her boyfriend , Peter , at the University of Virginia ( UVA ) .
Peter has an early acceptance due to his lacrosse playing .
When acceptance letters come in , Lara Jean learns she has not even made the wait - list .
After being wait - listed to the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill ( UNC ) , Lara Jean loses hope of attending college , but is eventually accepted to the College of William & Mary and decides to attend school there .
When Peter suggests that after freshman year Lara Jean can transfer to UVA , she begins to consider it her primary goal .
At home , Lara Jean 's father continues to date their neighbor , Trina Rothschild .
When Margot returns home from university in Scotland with her new boyfriend , Ravi , Lara Jean 's father asks all of his daughters for their blessing to
we d Trina .
The sisters all agree , though Margot , who has not seen the progression of her father 's relationship with Trina , is less excited and accepting than her sisters .
As Lara Jean finishes high school and settles into her new routine , adjusting to time spent without Peter and to Trina 's presence in her home , she learns that UNC has taken her off the wait - list and accepted her .
Her best friend Chris urges her to take a spontaneous road trip to the campus to see what she will be missing out on if she sticks to her plan .
Lara Jean falls in love with the campus and decides to go to UNC , despite the fact that it is even farther away than William & Mary .
Everyone is happy to hear Lara Jean 's news , except for Peter .
At graduation , Lara Jean 's father announces that he will be sending Lara Jean and her sisters to Korea for a month in order to connect with their heritage .
Lara Jean is secretly unhappy because it will cut into her dwindling days with Peter .
Lara Jean and her friends rent houses for Beach Week .
While there , she decides to sleep with Peter for the first time .
As they are about to have sex , Peter becomes uncomfortable and the two do not go through with it .
When she returns home , Lara Jean meets with Peter 's mother who tells her that Peter has started talking about transferring to UNC .
She asks Lara Jean to consider breaking up with Peter so that he can have a good college experience .
At the bachelorette party for Trina , Lara Jean gets drunk for the first time and breaks up with Peter , telling him she only wanted to sleep with him to neatly wrap up their relationship .
Peter is hurt , and when Lara Jean sobers up
she is devastated .
Trina urges Lara Jean to reconsider and at her father 's wedding , Lara Jean takes Peter aside and tells him she wants to continue their relationship .
Despite not knowing what the future holds , Lara Jean and Peter decide to stay together .
Peter writes a new contract between the two , echoing the contract drafted when they were fake dating in the first novel .
The book ends with Lara Jean feeling confident that her relationship with Peter will last .
REFERENCES