BAGEL AND CREAM CHEESE
A bagel and cream cheese ( also known as bagel with cream cheese ) is a common food pairing in American cuisine , the cuisine of New York City , and American Jewish cuisine , consisting in its basic form of an open - faced sandwich made of a bagel spread with cream cheese .
The bagel is typically sliced into two pieces , and can be served as - is or toasted .
The basic bagel with cream cheese serves as the base for other sandwiches such as the " lox and schmear " , a staple of delicatessens in the New York area , and across the U.S. AMERICAN CUISINE Section::::American cuisine .
A bagel with cream cheese is common in American cuisine and the cuisine of New York City .
In the United States , the bagel and cream cheese is often eaten for breakfast , and with smoked salmon is sometimes served for brunch .
In New York City circa 1900 , a popular combination consisted of a bagel topped with lox , cream cheese , capers , tomato , and red onion .
The combination of a bagel with cream cheese has been promoted to American consumers in the past by American food manufacturers and publishers .
In the early 1950s , Kraft Foods launched an " aggressive advertising campaign " that depicted Philadelphia - brand cream cheese with bagels .
In 1977 , Better Homes and Family Circle magazines published a bagel and cream cheese recipe booklet that was distributed in the magazines and also placed in supermarket dairy cases .
AMERICAN JEWISH
CUISINE Section::::American Jewish cuisine .
In American Jewish cuisine , a bagel and cream cheese is sometimes called a " whole schmear " or " whole schmeer " , indicating a bagel with cream cheese .
A " slab " is a bagel served with a slab of cream cheese atop it .
A " lox and a schmear " refers to a bagel with cream cheese and lox or smoked salmon .
Tomato , red onion , capers and chopped hard - boiled egg are additional ingredients that are sometimes used on the lox and schmear .
All of these terms are used at some delicatessens in New York City , particularly at Jewish delicatessens and older , more traditional delicatessens .
The lox and schmear likely originated in New York City around the time of the turn of the 20th century , when street vendors in the city sold salt - cured belly lox from pushcarts .
A high amount of salt in the fish necessitated the addition of bread and cheese to reduce the lox 's saltiness .
It was reported by U.S. newspapers in the early 1940s that bagels and lox were sold by delicatessens in New York City as a " Sunday morning treat " , and in the early 1950s , bagels and cream cheese combination were very popular in the United States , having permeated American culture .
MASS PRODUCTION Section::::Mass production .
Both bagels and cream cheese are mass - produced foods in the United States .
Additionally , in January 2003 , Kraft Foods began purveying a mass - produced convenience food product named Philadelphia To Go Bagel & Cream Cheese , which consisted of a combined package of two bagels and cream cheese .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
Bagels and cream cheese were provided to theater patrons by the cast of Bagels and Yox , a 1951 American - Yiddish Broadway revue , during the intermission period of the show .
The revue ran at the Holiday Theatre in New York City from September 1951 to February 1952 .
A 1951 review of Bagels and Yox published in Time magazine helped to popularize bagels to American consumers throughout the country .
" Bagel and Lox " is a humorous song about the virtues of the bagel , lox , and cream cheese sandwich .
It was written by Sid Tepper and Roy C. Bennett .
It has been recorded by several different artists , including Eddie " Rochester " Anderson and , more recently , Rob Schneider , Joan Jaffe , and Oleg Frish .
The lyrics to the chorus are : Bagel and lox with the cheese in the middle ,
Bagel and lox let it toast on the griddle , Bagel and lox with the cheese in the middle , And a slice of onion on the side .
SEE ALSO
* Appetizing store
* Bagel toast
* Cheese and crackers
* Cheese on toast * Welsh rarebit
* List of bread dishes * List of cheese dishes
*
Pizza bagel NOTES REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Bagelnomics : The Curious Pricing of New York 's Bagel With Cream Cheese .
Serious Eats .