MAMMA MIA !
HERE WE GO AGAIN Mamma Mia !
Here We Go Again
is a 2018 jukebox musical romantic comedy film written and directed by Ol Parker , from a story by Parker , Catherine Johnson , and Richard Curtis .
It is a follow - up to the 2008 film Mamma Mia ! , which in turn is based on the musical of the same name using the music of ABBA .
The film features an ensemble cast , including Lily James , Amanda Seyfried , Christine Baranski , Julie Walters , Pierce Brosnan , Andy García , Dominic Cooper , Colin Firth , Stellan Skarsgård , Jessica Keenan Wynn , Alexa Davies , Jeremy Irvine , Josh Dylan , Hugh Skinner , Cher , and Meryl Streep .
Both a prequel and a sequel , the plot is set after the events of the first film , and also features flashbacks to 1979 , telling the story of Donna Sheridan 's arrival on the island of Kalokairi and her first meetings with her daughter Sophie 's three possible fathers .
Due to the financial success of the first film , Universal Pictures had long been interested in a sequel .
The film was officially announced in May 2017 , with Parker hired to write and direct .
In June 2017 , many of the original cast confirmed their involvement , with James being cast in the role of Young Donna that July .
Filming took place from August to December 2017 in Croatia , and at Shepperton Studios in Surrey , England .
A British and American joint venture , the film was co - produced by Playtone , Littlestar Productions and Legendary Entertainment .
Mamma Mia !
Here We Go Again premiered at the Hammersmith Apollo in London on July 16 , 2018 , and was released in the United Kingdom and the United States on July 20 , 2018 , ten years to the week after its predecessor 's release , in both standard and IMAX formats .
The film has been a box office success , grossing over $ 393 million worldwide and received generally positive reviews , with critics praising the performances and musical numbers .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Sophie Sheridan is preparing for the grand reopening of her mother Donna 's hotel , following Donna 's death a year earlier .
She is upset because two of her fathers , Harry and Bill , are unable to make it to the reopening and she is having trouble in her relationship with Sky , who is in New York , over her memorializing her mother 's life .
In 1979 , a young Donna graduated from Oxford 's New College with Rosie and Tanya , and prepares to travel the world .
In Paris , she meets and parties with Harry .
They spend the night together , but Donna leaves soon after .
She later misses her boat to Kalokairi but is offered a ride by Bill , and along the way , they are able to help a stranded fisherman , Alexio , make it in time to stop the love of his life from marrying another .
Unbeknownst to Donna , Harry has followed her to Greece ; but he arrived too late , and sadly watches the boat sailing off in the distance .
In the present , Tanya and Rosie arrive to support Sophie with the reopening and it 's revealed that Rosie and Bill have split up .
Sophie then visits Sam , who is still grieving over the death of Donna .
Back in the past , Donna arrives on the island and while exploring the farmhouse , a sudden storm causes her to discover a spooked horse in the basement .
She goes in search of help only to find a young Sam riding his motorcycle and he helps her to save the horse .
Back in the present , a storm has caused serious disruption to Sophie 's plans for the grand reopening and prevented media coverage of the event .
Back in the past , Donna and Sam are enjoying a whirlwind romance , until Donna discovers a picture of Sam 's fiancée in his drawer .
Devastated , Donna demands that Sam leave the island and refuses to see him again .
In the present , Sam tells Sophie about her value to her mother .
Meanwhile , Harry leaves his business deal in Tokyo to support Sophie , and in Stockholm , Bill gets the same idea .
Bill and Harry meet at the docks but are told there are no boats .
However , Alexio gives Bill , Harry , the newly arrived Sky and hundreds of others boat passage .
In the past , a depressed Donna is heartbroken over Sam but is able to channel her anger into singing with Tanya and Rosie .
She meets Bill again and they go out on his boat ; while they are gone , Sam returns , having recently ended his engagement for Donna , but is saddened to hear that she is with another man and leaves the island again .
Donna discovers she is pregnant but has no idea which one of her three recent lovers is the father .
Sofia , the mother of the owner of the bar where Donna and the Dynamos performed , overhears Donna 's wish to stay on the island , and Donna happily accepts her offer to let her live at her farmhouse , where she eventually gives birth to Sophie .
Back in the present , the guests have arrived at the party and Sophie is reunited with her other two fathers and Sky .
Sophie reveals to Sky she is pregnant and has never felt closer to her mother , having now understood what her mother went through .
Bill and Rosie reunite over their grief for Donna .
Sophie 's estranged grandmother and Donna 's mother , Ruby , arrives despite Sophie having decided not to invite her .
She reveals that Sky tracked her down in New York and she wants to build a real relationship with Sophie .
Sophie then performs a song with Tanya and Rosie in honor of her mother , with her grandmother tearfully telling her afterward how proud she is of her .
It is then revealed that the manager of the hotel , Fernando , is Ruby 's ex - lover from 1959 in Mexico , and the two are joyously reunited .
Nine months later , Sophie has given birth to a baby boy named Donny .
Everyone has gathered for his christening where Tanya flirts with Fernando 's brother .
The ceremony takes place with Donna 's spirit watching over her daughter with pride .
At the end , all the characters , including Donna and the younger cast , sing " Super Trouper " at a huge party at Hotel Bella Donna .
CAST
*
Amanda Seyfried as Sophie Sheridan , Donna 's 25-year - old daughter .
* Meryl Streep as Donna Sheridan - Carmichael , Sophie 's late mother .
* Lily James as Young Donna , founder of Donna and the Dynamos .
* Christine Baranski as Tanya Chesham - Leigh , one of Donna 's best friends and former bandmates in Donna and the Dynamos ; a rich three - time divorcee .
* Jessica Keenan Wynn as Young Tanya .
* Julie Walters as Rosie Mulligan , one of Donna 's best friends and former bandmates in Donna and the Dynamos ; a fun - loving author in a relationship with Bill .
* Alexa Davies as Young Rosie .
* Pierce Brosnan as Sam Carmichael , an architect , Sophie 's stepfather , and possible father .
* Jeremy Irvine as Young Sam .
* Colin Firth as Harry Bright , Sophie 's possible father , a British businessman .
* Hugh Skinner as Young Harry .
* Stellan Skarsgård as Bill Anderson , Sophie 's possible father , a Swedish sailor and travel writer , Sofia 's great - nephew , Lazaros 's cousin , and also as Kurt Anderson , Bill 's obese twin brother .
* Josh Dylan as Young Bill .
* Dominic Cooper as Sky , Sophie 's husband .
* Cher as Ruby Sheridan , Donna 's mother , Sophie 's grandmother , and Sam 's mother - in - law .
* Andy García as Fernando Cienfuegos , the Mexican manager of the Hotel Bella Donna , old lover of Ruby 's from 1959 .
* Omid Djalili as a Greek customs officer .
* Celia Imrie as the Vice - Chancellor of the university at which Donna , Tanya and Rosie studied .
* Maria Vacratsis as Sofia , Bill 's great aunt and Sophie 's namesake , a local who owns the shack in which Donna and Sam stay and which eventually becomes Donna 's home .
* Panos Mouzourakis as Lazaros , Sofia 's son and Bill 's cousin who owns the bar at which both his band and Donna and the Dynamos perform .
* Gerard Monaco as Alexio , a local Greek fisherman .
* Anna Antoniades as Apollonia , Alexio 's lover and later wife .
Section::::Cast .
Cameo appearances * Björn Ulvaeus as a university professor .
* Benny Andersson as the pianist in the Parisian restaurant during " Waterloo " .
* Jonathan Goldsmith as Raphael Cienfuegos , Fernando Cienfuegos 's widower brother .
MUSICAL NUMBERS Section::::Musical numbers .
A soundtrack album was released on July 13 , 2018 by Capitol and Polydor Records in the United States and internationally , respectively .
The album was produced by Benny Andersson , who also served as the album 's executive producer alongside Björn Ulvaeus and Judy Craymer .
Each song is featured within the film , with the exception of " I Wonder ( Departure ) " and " The Day Before You Came " .
* " Thank You for the Music " – Sophie * *
" When I Kissed the Teacher " – Young Donna and the Dynamos , Vice - Chancellor * *
" I Wonder ( Departure ) " – Young Donna and the Dynamos * * " One of Us " – Sophie and Sky
* * " Waterloo " – Young Harry and Young Donna * * " SOS " –
Sam * *
" Why Did It Have to Be Me ? " –
Young Bill , Young Donna and Young Harry
*
* " I Have a Dream " –
Young Donna
* * " Kisses of Fire " –
Lazaros * * " Andante , Andante " – Young Donna
* * " The Name of the Game " –
Young Donna *
* " Knowing Me , Knowing You " – Young Donna and Young Sam
* * " Mamma Mia " – Young Donna and the Dynamos
* * " Angel Eyes " – Rosie , Tanya , and Sophie * * " Dancing Queen " – Sophie , Rosie , Tanya , Sam , Bill , and Harry * *
" I 've Been Waiting for You " – Sophie , Rosie , and Tanya * * " Fernando " – Ruby , Fernando
* * " My Love , My Life " – Young Donna , Donna , Sophie
* * " Super Trouper " – Ruby , Donna , Rosie , Tanya , Sophie , Sky , Sam , Bill , Harry , Fernando , Young Donna , Young Rosie , Young Tanya , Young Bill , Young Sam , and Young Harry
* * " The Day Before You Came " – Donna
* * Songs featured on the soundtrack album but omitted from the film .
* Songs featured in the film but omitted from the soundtrack album .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Due to Mamma Mia ! financial success , Hollywood studio chief David Linde , co - chairman of Universal Pictures , told the Daily Mail that it would take a while , but there could be a sequel .
He stated that he would be delighted if Judy Craymer , Catherine Johnson , Phyllida Lloyd , Benny Andersson and Björn Ulvaeus agreed to the project , noting that there are still many ABBA songs to make use of .
Mamma Mia !
Here We Go Again was announced on May 19 , 2017 , with a release date of July 20 , 2018 .
It was written and directed by Ol Parker .
On September 27 , 2017 , Benny Andersson confirmed 3 ABBA songs that would be featured in the film : " When I Kissed the Teacher , " " I Wonder ( Departure ) , " and " Angeleyes . "
" I Wonder ( Departure ) " was cut from the film , but is included on the soundtrack album .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
On June 1 , 2017 , it was announced that Seyfried would return as Sophie .
Later that month , Dominic Cooper confirmed that he would return for the sequel , along with Streep , Firth and Brosnan as Sky , Donna , Harry , and Sam , respectively .
In July 2017 , Baranski was also confirmed to return as Tanya .
On July 12 , 2017 , Lily James was cast to play the role of young Donna .
On August 3 , 2017 , Jeremy Irvine and Alexa Davies were also cast in the film , with Irvine playing Brosnan 's character Sam in a past era , and Hugh Skinner to play Young Harry , Davies as a young Rosie , played by Julie Walters .
On August 16 , 2017 , it was announced that Jessica Keenan Wynn had been cast as a young Tanya , who is played by Baranski .
Julie Walters and Stellan Skarsgård also reprised their roles as Rosie and Bill , respectively .
On October 16 , 2017 , it was announced that singer and actress Cher had joined the cast , in her first on - screen film role since 2010 , and her first film with Streep since Silkwood .
The part was written specifically for Cher , and she got to choose Andy García as her romantic partner .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography on the film began on August 12 , 2017 in Croatia , including the island of Vis .
In October 2017 , the cast gathered at Shepperton Studios in Surrey , England , to film song and dance numbers with Cher .
Filming wrapped on December 2 , 2017 .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Mamma Mia !
Here We Go Again was released on July 20 , 2018 by Universal Pictures , in the UK , US and other selected countries in both standard and IMAX formats .
The film premiered on July 16 , 2018 at the Hammersmith Apollo in London .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
The first trailer for the film was released on December 21 , 2017 , in front of Pitch Perfect 3 , another Universal Pictures film .
Cher performed " Fernando " at the Las Vegas CinemaCon on April 25 , 2018 , after footage of the film was shown .
Universal sponsored YouTube stars the Merrell Twins to perform a cover version of the song " Mamma Mia " to promote the film .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Mamma Mia !
Here We Go Again was released via digital copy on October 9 , 2018 and released on DVD , Blu - ray , and 4 K UHD Combo Pack on October 23 , 2018 .
The film debuted at the top of the NPD VideoScan First Alert chart for the week ending on October 27 , 2018 .
It retained the top spot on the chart for the week ending on November 3 , 2018 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Mamma Mia !
Here We Go Again grossed $ 120.6 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 273.1 million in other territories , for a total worldwide gross of $ 393.7 million , against a production budget of $ 75 million .
In June 2018 , three weeks prior to its release , official industry tracking had the film debuting to $ 27–33 million , which increased to as much as $ 36 million by the week of its release .
It made $ 14.3 million on its first day , including $ 3.4 million from Thursday night previews .
It went on to debut to $ 35 million , finishing second , behind fellow newcomer The Equalizer 2 ( $ 36 million ) , and besting the opening of the first film ( $ 27.8 million ) by over 24 % .
It fell 57 % to $ 15.1 million in its second weekend , finishing second behind newcomer .
In its third weekend the film grossed $ 9 million , dropping to fourth place , and $ 5.8 million in its fourth weekend , finishing seventh .
In the United Kingdom , the film grossed $ 12.7 million in its opening weekend , topping the box office and achieving the fourth biggest opening for a film in 2018 .
In its second weekend of international release , the film made $ 26.6 million ( for a running total of $ 98.6 million ) .
Its largest new markets were France ( $ 1.7 million ) , Poland ( $ 1.3 million ) , Switzerland ( $ 223,000 ) and Croatia ( $ 151,000 ) , while its best holdovers were Australia ( $ 9.5 million ) , the UK ( $ 8.6 million ) and Germany ( $ 8.2 million ) .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 81 % based on 231 reviews , and a weighted average of 6.3/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Mamma Mia !
Here We Go Again doubles down on just about everything fans loved about the original — and my my , how can fans resist it ? "
On Metacritic the film has a weighted average score of 60 out of 100 based on 46 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A – " on an A+ to F scale , the same score as its predecessor , while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave it an 83 % overall positive score .
Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian termed the sequel as " weirdly irresistible " and gave it three out of five stars .
He described his reaction to the first film as " a combination of hives and bubonic plague , " but concedes that this time , the relentlessness and greater self - aware comedy made him smile .
He concludes : " More enjoyable than I thought .
But please .
Enough now . "
Mark Kermode of The Observer gave the film five stars and commented , " This slick sequel delivers sharp one - liners , joyously contrived plot twists and an emotional punch that left our critic reeling . "
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone awarded the film two and a half stars out of five , noting the absence of Streep for the majority of the film hindered his enjoyment , and saying , " her absence is deeply felt since the three - time Oscar winner sang and danced her heart out as Donna Sheridan " .
Lindsay Bahr of Associated Press awarded the film three out of four stars , calling it " wholly ridiculous " , but complimenting its self - awareness .
She also praised James ' performance and singing talent .
Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun - Times gave the sequel a mixed review , awarding it two stars out of four , criticizing the reprises of " Dancing Queen " and " Super Trouper " as uninspired , and feeling that some of the musical numbers dragged the pacing .
He considered the younger counterparts to the main characters " energetic " and " likeable . "
Stephanie Zacharek of Time gave the film a mixed review , writing " Mamma Mia !
Here We Go Again
is atrocious .
And wonderful .
It 's all the reasons you should never go to the movies .
And all the reasons you should race to get a ticket . " ACCOLADES People 's Choice Awards REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS