FOREVER
MY GIRL
Forever My Girl is a 2018 American romantic drama film written and directed by Bethany Ashton Wolf based on the novel by Heidi McLaughlin .
It follows a country musician ( Alex Roe ) who sets out to win over the girl he left at the altar eight years before ( Jessica Rothe ) .
Abby Ryder Fortson , Travis Tritt , and John Benjamin Hickey also star .
The film was released in the United States on January 19 , 2018 .
It received negative reviews from critics , who denounced the writing and chemistry between the actors , and compared it negatively to Nicholas Sparks films .
However , audience reception was more positive , and the film was a modest box office success grossing $ 16 million on a $ 3.5 million budget .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In Saint Augustine , Louisiana , Josie is left at the altar by her fiancé Liam .
Eight years later , Liam is a successful country singer .
The day after a concert in New Orleans , Liam learns that Mason , one of his groomsmen from the wedding , has been killed in a car accident .
Liam returns to St. Augustine and attends Mason 's funeral .
Although Liam attempts to be discreet , Josie recognizes him .
After Mason 's burial , Josie approaches Liam and punches him in the stomach .
Liam stays with his father , Pastor Brian , although his father is bitter that Liam never kept in contact after becoming famous .
While becoming reacquainted with the town , Liam encounters Josie at a flower shop she owns .
Liam learns that Josie has a seven - year old daughter , Billy , and that he is the father .
Josie confesses that she found out she was pregnant two weeks after he left her at the altar .
Although Josie tried to contact him , Liam never returned her call .
Liam eventually persuades Josie to let him spend time with Billy , albeit on Josie 's terms .
Billy quickly realizes Liam is her father , much to Josie 's surprise , and supports Liam 's idea .
Liam and Billy bond , with Billy displaying her father 's musical ability .
Josie even agrees to let Billy stay the night with Liam .
As Liam tucks her in , Billy asks him why he left Josie , and Liam admits he was young and confused , although he regrets his decision .
After Billy falls asleep , Josie asks Liam on a date .
Liam flies Josie to New Orleans for their date , although they are stopped by the press .
Liam publicly announces his love for Josie .
After returning to Saint Augustine , Liam and Billy continue to bond .
Billy chokes on her lunch , but Liam is frozen after having a flashback to his mother 's death .
Jake , Josie 's brother , saves Billy .
Distraught at his inability to act , Liam gets drunk at a bar .
Jake visits Liam and tells him that Josie and Billy would be better off without him .
Liam leaves the next morning without telling Josie or Billy .
Liam returns to his tour and performs in London .
However , his manager Sam inspires him to return to his family .
Liam returns to Saint Augustine and reunites with Josie .
Liam and Josie are married , and Liam performs a song on stage with Billy in Berlin .
CAST
* Alex Roe as Liam Page – Country Singer * Jessica Rothe as Josie –
Girlfriend / Wife * Abby Ryder Fortson as Billy –
Daughter * Travis Tritt as Walt * Peter Cambor as Sam – Manager * Gillian Vigman as Doris – Publicist
* Judith Hoag as Dr. Whitman * Tyler Riggs as Jake –
Josie 's Brother * John Benjamin Hickey as Pastor Brian Page – Liam 's Father PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production . Section::::Development .
Author Heidi McLaughlin was inspired to write Forever My Girl after seeing a picture of a man on Facebook who looked like he was trying to apologize to a girl .
To choose the name of Liam Page it took her a total of 10 or 15 minutes , and that same night she wrote the first 5,000 words .
After her book was published , she received an offer from LD Entertainment for a film based on the book .
On adapting the book for film , Roe said , " It was difficult to accommodate everything in an hour and a half obviously and there were also other changes that Bethany [ Wolf ] thought were important . "
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
McLaughlin said that writing for Liam and Josie was easy because she has friends who are in bands .
For the role of Liam , Roe had to learn to sing and play the guitar .
Brett Boyett , the film 's musical supervisor , helped him practice every day for almost three months .
To research his accent Roe watched interviews of country music singers .
He was nervous about acting on stage and talked to country group Little Big Town about performing in front of 50,000 people .
Roe formed a band in Los Angeles and held several performances for close friends to practice .
McLaughlin positively compared Roe to actor Stephen Amell , stating that , " Alex Roe looks like Amell but younger , so for me it 's a perfect choice . "
Rothe said she was attracted to the role of Josie for her strength and female empowerment .
McLaughlin originally pictured the Australian supermodel Miranda Kerr for the role , and remarked that Rothe resembled a blonde version of Kerr .
Rothe and Roe did not know each other beforehand but had several friends in common , and hung out several times before filming in Atlanta to feel comfortable around each other .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Forever My Girl opened on January 19 , 2018 , and grossed $ 4.7 million from 1,115 theaters in its opening weekend , finishing 10th .
It held well in its second weekend , dropping just 12 % to $ 3.7 million .
The film went on to make a total of $ 16.4 million , against a production budget of $ 3.5 million .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 26 % based on 47 reviews , with an average rating of 4.3/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Forever My Girl offers a suitably picturesque placeholder for romance fans between Nicholas Sparks films , but other viewers may end up crying for the wrong reasons . "
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 36 out of 100 , based on 18 critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A " on an A+ to F scale .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The film was released on DVD and Blu - ray on April 24 , 2018 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS