COKE STUDIO PAKISTAN ( SEASON 10 )
Coke Studio is a Pakistani musical television series .
Its tenth season began on 11 August and ended on 21 September 2017 .
Strings and The Coca - Cola Company emceed the show as executive producers , while the show returned with the previous year 's format of music directors leading and producing their own songs under Strings ' supervision , despite the decision of not adopting this format for next year .
The season featured 7 episodes , each having 4 tracks , plus one promo song ; making total of 29 songs .
It turned out to be the Strings ' last Coke Studio production .
SEASON LINE - UP
CHART FEATURED ARTISTES *
Ali Sethi *
Aima Baig *
Danyal Zafar
* Ali Zafar *
Rahat Fateh Ali Khan * Jabar Abbas
* Momina Mustehsan * Waqar Ehsin
* Attaullah Khan
Esakhelvi
* Sanwal Khan Esakhelvi
* Qurat - ul - Ain Balouch
* Sahir Ali Bagga *
Hina Nasrullah
* Ali Hamza * Nabeel Shaukat Ali * Faraz Anwar
* Faiza Mujahid * Ahmed Jahanzeb
* Zaw Ali * Sajjad Ali * Nirmal Roy * Umair Jaswal
* Farhan Saeed
* Akbar Ali
* Rachel Viccaji
*
Shuja Haider * Jaffer Zaidi * Humaira Channa * Mekaal Hasan *
Salman Ahmad
* Shani Arshad
* Arieb Azhar
* Ali Noor * Irteassh * Humera Arshad * Kaavish * Amanat Ali
* Natasha Khan * Javed Bashir * Shafqat Amanat Ali
* Strings MUSIC
DIRECTORS
Section::::Season line - up chart .
Section::::Music directors .
Shuja Haider , Shani Arshad , and Jaffer Zaidi returned to the show ; while Ali Hamza ( Noori ) , Sajjad Ali , Mekaal Hasan ( Mekaal Hasan Band ) , Sahir Ali Bagga and Salman Ahmad made their Coke Studio debut as directors .
Each director produced individual performances too ; all under the supervision of Strings .
There was at least one tribute song by each of them too .
MUSICIANS Section::::Musicians . !
House band * Aahad Nayani ; drum kit player * Kamran Zafar ; bass guitarist * Babar Ali Khanna ; tabla and dholak player ; the only musician who appeared on all seasons * Abdul Aziz Kazi ; percussions player * Imran Akhoond ; guitarist * Haider Ali ; pianist * Omran Shafique ; guitarist !
Strings section * Javed Iqbal ; first violinist * Ghulam Abbas * Ghulam Muhammad
* Muhammad Ilyas * Babar Ali * Khawar Hussain !
Backing vocalists
* Rachel Viccaji
* Shahab Hussain * Natasha Khan !
Humnawa * Jamshed Sabri *
Naveed Sabri *
Zahid Sabri * Mohammad Shan Sabri *
Ahmad Hasan
* Asif Ali
* Ghulam Hasan * Junaid Ali !
Guest musicians
* under Mekaal Hasan 's direction * Zain Ahsan ; ukulele player * Mohammad Ahsan ; flute player * under Salman Ahmad 's direction * Ustad Aashiq Ali Mir ; tabla player * Sherjan Ahmad ; acoustic guitar player * Raees Ahmad ; violinist * under Sajjad Ali 's direction * Leonard Massey ; clarinet player * backing vocalists
* Wajji Ali
* Ahsan Ahmed * Muhammad Ahsan Shabbir * Aamir Zaki ; guitar player under Jaffer Zaidi 's direction
* Sajid Ali ; flute player * Nadeem Iqbal ; harmonium player * Imran Shehzad ; tabla player * Bradley D'Souza ; bassist * Amir Azhar ; mandolin player ; rubab player ; classical guitar player * Adeel Ali ; guitarist * Joshua Keyth Benjamin ; pianist * Gul Muhammad ; sarangi player
* Ali Maaz Zafar ; bassist * Syed Adeel Ali ; guitarist * Adnan Jehanzaib ; clarinet player * Ghulam Muhammad ;
cello player * Shehroze Hussain ; sitar player * Javed Iqbal ; violinist PRODUCTION FORMAT Section::::Production .
Section::::Format .
On 27 February 2017 , Rafay Mahmood of The Express Tribune stated , " the biggest challenge for the show is to bridge the gap between the indie scene and the mainstream musicians " .
Earlier , it was also rumoured that the show was a ten - year deal to begin with , and after Strings ' third , Rohail Hyatt will come back in season 10 to give a farewell .
However , the multiple - producers format was a hit previous year and it made the show to be returned with the same format , despite Strings ' claim that the show will follow the original format .
The show had been promoted in media by the hashtag # CokeStudio10 .
In launching ceremony on 11 August , Strings shared that the process of making songs has three stages : the first is when it is decided by December what song to feature ; the second is when the artistes construct and reconstruct the songs in the jamming room ; and the third is recording phase when they bring their own special vibe to the tracks .
The performance version for release is recorded in one take , with 21 cameras shooting simultaneously .
DEBUTANTS Section::::Debutants .
Humera Arshad made her Coke Studio debut with this season , she exclusively told DAWN Images , " There are no music releasing companies and under such circumstances I think Coke Studio is doing a great job " .
Sahir Ali Bagga also made his show debut as a featured artiste as well as a director , on which he said , " I always admired the platform , and it was a dream to be part of the team .
I 'm very excited to be part of Coke Studio , especially in the milestone season 10 .
"
Like past seasons , this season too featured some new artistes ; who made their debut through the show .
Maliha Rehman of DAWN reported on 23 July 2017 , " Salman Ahmad 's son Sherjan Ahmad will play the acoustic guitar to his father 's vocals , classical singer Javed Bashir 's brother Akbar Ali will be in the limelight and house band member violinist Javed Iqbal is excited to share the stage with his son Ghulam Muhammad on the cello this year . "
Co - producer Bilal Maqsood said , " All of these young musicians are actually very good at what they do . "
" It was just by chance that Season 10 will end up featuring so many of them " , he continued revealing names of some young talent featuring in the show including Sanwal Khan Esakhelvi ; Attaullah Khan Esakhelvi 's son ; who was approached to him by his father Anwar Maqsood .
Young Esakhelvi said on his show debut , " Coke Studio is exciting for me because my father and I will be singing a mash - up together that has mostly been composed by him with some additions by me . "
Sajjad Ali , on career debut of his daughter Zaw Ali , said , " This is probably one of the rare times that a father and daughter will be singing together " .
Ali Zafar commented on the career debut of his youngest brother Danyal Zafar , " I feel that the struggle is very important and Danyal needs to experience it in order to move ahead . "
Danyal Zafar said , " I always dreamt of a debut that could best help me express myself as an artist in such a way that my music could also connect with people . "
Aima Baig said in launching ceremony on her show debut , " As a new artiste to have a platform where you can perform whatever you want is like dream comes true
and I feel proud to get this opportunity . "
STRINGS ' FAREWELL Section::::Strings ' farewell .
On 29 October , the Strings announced the farewell from the show .
They said that the season 10 will be their last production , " It has been a fantastic journey for us over the course of 4 seasons and we are grateful to have had the opportunity to learn and share our work " .
They further said , " 2018 will mark 30 years of Strings and we are super excited to celebrate with all of you " .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
An episode went on - air on Saturday in broadcast syndication , a day after each track was released online .
Each episode was aired in one - hour timeslot , with each track preceded by its behind the scenes short clip .
By the day , BTS too releases online .
Only episode 7 was released and aired on Thursday , 21 September , to respect the Holy month of Muharram .
PROMO SONG Section::::Promo song .
The season was introduced by the collaborative rendition of " Qaumi Taranah " by the featured artistes .
Released on 4 August , the anthem has been recomposed by Strings , " We hope to rekindle the spirit of patriotism and social consciousness in the heart of every Pakistani .
This is more significant now than ever , as we are marking seventy years of our independence . "
EPISODES
Hafeez Jullundhri Strings
Season 's ft . artistes to celebrate the 70 years of Pakistan ; originally composed by Ahmed Ghulamali ChaglaSalman Azmi Shuja Haider
Ahmed JahanzebShafqat
Amanat Ali !
3
" Chaa Rahi Kaali Ghata " Asim Raza
Sahir Ali Bagga
Hina
NasrullahAmanat Ali originally traditional ; additionally composed by Bagga !
4
" Muntazir " colspan="2"Strings
Danyal ZafarMomina Mustehsan !
5
" Ranjish Hi Sahi " Talib Baghpati Jaffer Zaidi Ali Sethi written by Ahmad Faraz ; originally composed by Nisar Bazmi and sung by Mehdi HassanAli HamzaWaqar Ehsin folk song !
7
" Sayonee " Sabir ZafarShah Hussain Salman Ahmad Rahat Fateh Ali KhanAli Noor recomposed by Salman Ahmad ; originally ft .
in Junoon 's 1997 album Azadi ( album )
as a single ! 8 " Faasle " colspan="2"Jaffer Zaidi Kaavishft .
Qurat - ul - Ain Balouch ballad !
9
" Jaan - e - Bahaaraan " Tanveer Naqvi Shuja Haider Ali Zafar originally composed by Master Inayat Hussain and sung by Saleem RazaLaal Meri Pat " Strings Qurat - ul - Ain Balouch ft .
Akbar AliArieb Azhar traditional folk ; translation of Bu Ali Shah Qalandar 's ghazal by Shozab Askari !
11
" Ronay Na Diya " Sudarshan Faakir colspan="2"Sajjad
Ali ft .
Zaw Ali originally sung by Begum Akhtar !
12 " Baazi " Asim Raza
colspan="2"Sahir Ali Bagga ft .
Aima Baig
traditional folk ! 13
" Mujh Se Pehli Si Muhabbat " Faiz Ahmed Faiz Mekaal Hasan Humaira
ChannaNabeel Shaukat Ali originally composed by Rasheed Attre and sung by Noor JehanJaved Bashir 's 2007 album SubrangAkbar Alift .
Aamir Zaki on guitar !
15
" Dekh Tera Kya""Latthay Di Chaadar " Muhammad NasirBashir
Manzar rowspan="2"Shani Arshad
Farhan SaeedQurat - ul - Ain Balouch !
16
" Julie " Ali Zafar colspan="2"composed by Ali Zafarft .
Danyal Zafar on guitar !
17 " Jindjaani " colspan="3"Ali
Hamza ft .
Nirmal RoyIbn - e - InshaShakir Shuja
AbadiMazhar NiaziFarooq Rokhri
Shuja Haider colspan="2"originally composed by Attaullah Khan Esakhelvift .
Sanwal Khan Esakhelvi !
19 " Rangrez " Sajid Gul
Sahir Ali Bagga
Rahat Fateh Ali Khan modern Sufi song !
20
" Ujaalon Mein "
Adnan Ahmad Jaffer Zaidi Faraz AnwarFaiza Mujahid originally composed by Anwar of Mizraab !
21
" Bol " Faiz Ahmed Faiz
Shani Arshad
Shafqat Amanat Ali poetry ; originally composed by Arshad MehmoodUmair JaswalJabar Abbas originally composed by Farrukh Fateh Ali Khan and sung by Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan !
23
" Yo Soch " Sabir ZafarNatasha Khan Strings Ali ZafarNatasha Khan inspiration from musical theatre !
24
" Kaatay Na Katay " Saifuddin Saif Ali Hamza Aima BaigHumera ArshadRachel Viccaji originally composed by Nisar Bazmi and sung by Runa Laila for 1972 film Umrao Jaan Ada !
25
" Ghoom Taana " Sabir ZafarSalman Ahmad Salman Ahmad Momina MustehsanIrteassh recomposed by Salman Ahmad ; originally ft .
in Junoon 's 2003 album DewaarHamd !
27
" Baanware " Syed Raza Tirmazi colspan="2"Shuja Haider ft .
Aima Baig
" Bhooli Bisri " ; originally sung by Mehdi Hassan !
28
" Maula Tera Noor " Sabir Zafar Shani Arshad Shafqat Amanat Ali Hamd ; composed by Arshad !
29
" Us Rah Par " Shoaib Mansoor Jaffer Zaidi Ali HamzaAli Zafarft .
Strings originally composed by Mansoor ; sung by Junaid Jamshed and released for his 1999 album Us Rah Par BROADCAST TELEVISION Section::::Broadcast .
Section::::Television .
Following television channels air the episodes in Pakistan ; !
Timeslot !
Channel 05:00 PM ARY Digital rowspan="4"06:00
PM
Geo Entertainment
TVOne Global Dawn News Dunya News
rowspan="13"07:00 PM Hum TV Geo News Express Entertainment News
One
Aaj News
Abb Takk News
Neo News
Hum Sitaray Waqt News
Such TV
7 News
Filmazia
24 News HD
rowspan="10"08:00 PM
Aaj Entertainment 8XM See TV Capital TV Hum Masala Jaag TV
Metro1
News
Lahore News HD
Filmax
Film World rowspan="11"09:00 PM
Urdu 1
ATV ARY Zindagi Jalwa TV City 42 City
41 Rohi Play
Entertainment Apna Channel
Punjab TV Raavi rowspan="6"10:00
PM Geo Kahani A - Plus TV Channel 5 Health TV Aruj TV
AXN RADIO Section::::Radio .
Following radio stations air the songs in Pakistan ; !
Day !
Timeslot !
FM rowspan="8"Monday rowspan="7"07:00 PM 89 91 89.4 101 Hot 105 107 Awaz
105 10:00 PM 106.2
Tuesday
08:00 PM 107.4 RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The show has been critically viewed for not producing new songs .
Rafay Mahmood of The Express Tribune said that the lack of original music " has become a chronic problem with Coke Studio .
With almost every passing season the title cover studio is becoming more relevant to the show than anything else .
"
After the season 's artiste line up was revealed on 4 July , The News criticized the incomplete revealment while noting that Mooroo , Abid Brohi , SomeWhatSuper , Khumariyaan and Sounds of Kolachi should have been included in the show .
Asif Nawaz of The Express Tribune commented , " While it 's only time that will tell how the latest season unfolds , the urge to indulge in presenting our two cents about it seems too tempting to resist . "
For the promo song ; the recreated version of " Qaumi Taranah " ; Umnia Shahid of The Express Tribune praised only Ali Zafar 's performance and said , " The rest were simply wax figures executing a song – any song – any random song .
Except , it was n't just any random song .
"
DAWN Images praised only Attaullah Khan Esakhelvi but said , " Overall , the song , the video , everything seems to be forgettable " .
This rendition seemed of " dull and lack emotions " to Asfia Fazal of Business Recorder .
It felt " disjointed " to Maheen Sabeeh of The News , " not inspiring or motivating at all " to Shafiq Ul Hasan , and " no goose bumps " to Imane Babar Wahedi ; latter both of The Express Tribune .
EXTRA NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS