A QUIET PLACE ( FILM )
A Quiet Place is a 2018 American post - apocalyptic horror film directed by John Krasinski , who wrote the screenplay with Bryan Woods and Scott Beck .
The film stars Krasinski , alongside Emily Blunt , Millicent Simmonds and Noah Jupe .
The plot revolves around a family facing struggles in a post - apocalyptic world inhabited by blind monsters with an acute sense of hearing .
The film entered development when Beck and Woods began developing a story that would lead into the film .
In July 2016 , Krasinski read a spec script and was hired to direct and rewrite the script in March the following year .
The film drew inspiration from other films , such as Alien , No Country for Old Men and In the Bedroom .
Krasinski and Blunt were cast in the lead roles in May 2017 .
Filming took place in upstate New York from May to November 2017 .
Erik Aadahl and Ethan Van der Ryn served as supervising sound editors , with Marco Beltrami composing a traditional musical score .
The film was produced by Sunday Night and Platinum Dunes .
A Quiet Place premiered at South by Southwest on March 9 , 2018 , and was released in the United States on April 6 , 2018 , by Paramount Pictures .
It became a major box office hit , grossing over $ 340 million worldwide , and received acclaim from critics , who praised its originality and atmosphere , as well as the acting , direction , and sound design , calling it a " smart , wickedly frightening good time .
" It was chosen by both the National Board of Review and American Film Institute as one of the Top 10 Films of 2018 , and received numerous award nominations , including a Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score and Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Supporting Role for Blunt .
A sequel is scheduled to be released on May 15 , 2020 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Over three months in 2020 , most of Earth 's human and animal populations have been wiped out by sightless creatures of unknown origin .
The creatures , attacking anything that makes noise , have hypersensitive hearing and indestructible , armored skin .
The Abbott familywife Evelyn , husband Lee , congenitally deaf daughter Regan , and sons Marcus and Beausilently scavenge for supplies in a deserted town .
While out in the open , the family communicates with American Sign Language ( ASL ) .
Four - year - old Beau is drawn to a battery - powered space shuttle toy , but Lee takes it away due to the noise it would make .
Regan returns the toy to Beau , who also takes the batteries that his father removed from it .
Beau activates the toy when the family is walking home and crossing a bridge , giving away his location to a nearby creature which kills him before Lee can save him .
Over a year later , Regan continues to struggle with guilt over her brother 's death , Evelyn enters the final stages of pregnancy , and Lee fruitlessly tries to make radio contact with the outside world .
Lee attempts to upgrade Regan 's cochlear implant with scavenged miniature amplifiers to restore her hearing , but the devices are ineffective .
Later , Lee takes Marcus to a nearby river with a large waterfall to teach him to fish while Regan visits Beau 's memorial .
Lee explains to Marcus that they are safe from the creatures in the presence of louder sounds , as the sounds mask out their voices .
Marcus then reveals that Regan blames herself for Beau 's death and needs her father to tell her he still loves her .
Alone at the house , Evelyn goes into labor earlier than expected .
While making her way to their basement , she steps on an exposed nail .
In pain , she accidentally drops a glass picture frame and alerts a nearby creature .
Evelyn flips a switch that changes the exterior house lights to red as a danger signal to the others and struggles to remain silent during her contractions .
Arriving at the farm and seeing the lights , Lee instructs Marcus to set off fireworks as a diversion .
Arriving at the house , Lee finds Evelyn hiding in the bathroom with their newborn son and , along with Evelyn , makes his way to their improvised soundproofed basement .
Lee leaves to find the other children , promising Evelyn he will protect them .
Evelyn then falls asleep but soon wakes to discover that the barn basement is flooded with water from a broken pipe and that a creature is stalking her .
Regan , hurrying back to the farm , takes refuge atop a grain silo with Marcus , lighting a fire to alert their father of their whereabouts .
However , they run out of lighter fluid and the fire dies before they can attract Lee 's attention .
A hatch door then suddenly gives way , and Marcus falls into the silo .
The sound of the door falling distracts the creature that was stalking Evelyn and it targets Marcus and Regan .
Marcus sinks into the corn and nearly suffocates , but Regan jumps in and saves him before he becomes entrapped .
Regan 's cochlear implant reacts to the proximity of the creature by emitting a high - frequency sound that drives it away .
The children proceed to escape from the silo and reunite with their father .
The creature returns , attacking and wounding Lee , while Marcus and Regan hide in a pickup truck .
After seeing his father wounded , Marcus shouts impulsively , attracting the creature to the truck .
Due to its unpleasant sound , Regan turns her cochlear implant off for the first time , unaware of the fact that it could have potentially driven the creature away .
Lee signs to Regan that he loves her and always has , before sacrificing himself by yelling to draw the creature away from his children .
Regan and Marcus roll the truck down a hill to escape and reunite with Evelyn and the baby at the farmhouse .
The four then retreat to the house 's basement .
When the creature returns , Regan , who realizes that the sound made by the implant distresses the creature , switches the device back on and places it on a nearby microphone , amplifying the feedback .
Painfully disoriented , the creature exposes the flesh beneath its armored head , which Evelyn shoots , killing it .
The family views a CCTV monitor , showing two creatures attracted by the noise of the shotgun blast approaching the house .
With their newly acquired knowledge of the creatures ' weakness , the members of the family arm themselves and prepare to fight back .
CAST
* John Krasinski , as Lee Abbott , an engineer , husband of Evelyn , and the father of Regan , Marcus , and Beau .
Krasinski described his character as a survivalist who focuses on getting his family through each day .
* Emily Blunt as Evelyn Abbott , a doctor , wife of Lee , and the mother to their three children , Regan , Marcus , and Beau .
Krasinski describes her character as wanting to ensure that their children " be fully - formed , fully - thinking people . "
* Millicent Simmonds as Regan Abbott , Lee and Evelyn 's deaf daughter , and Marcus ' and Beau 's older sister .
Krasinski said he sought a deaf actress " ... for many reasons ; I did n't want a non - deaf actress pretending to be deaf .
Most importantly though , because a deaf actress would help my knowledge and my understanding of the situations tenfold .
I wanted someone who lives it and who could teach me about it on set . "
* Noah Jupe as Marcus Abbott , the oldest son of Lee and Evelyn , and Regan 's and Beau 's brother .
Krasinski noticed Jupe in the 2016 miniseries The Night Manager and later saw an early screening of the 2017 film Suburbicon to evaluate Jupe 's performance .
* Cade Woodward as Beau Abbott , the younger son of Lee and Evelyn .
* Ezekiel and Evangelina Cavoli as newborn Baby Abbott .
* Leon Russom as a man in the woods , whose wife was killed by the creatures .
PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT AND WRITING Section::::Production .
Section::::Development and writing .
A Quiet Place is a production of Sunday Night and Platinum Dunes ; it was produced on a budget of .
Krasinski wrote the screenplay with story co - writers Scott Beck and Bryan Woods .
Beck and Woods grew up together in the US state of Iowa , and had watched numerous silent films in college .
By 2013 , they began working on the story that would lead to the film .
They used their experience growing up close to farmland as the basis , including a grain silo setting as a place considered dangerous in their upbringing .
They initiated their approach with a 15-page proof of concept .
Initially , the writers had considered developing the film into a Cloverfield installment , but after pitching their ideas to the studio collectively , all of those involved decided to keep the film its own entity .
In January 2016 , Beck and Woods began writing A Quiet Place in earnest .
Krasinski read their spec script the following July .
The concept of parents protecting their children appealed to him , especially as his second child with actress Emily Blunt had just been born .
Blunt encouraged him to direct the film .
By March 2017 , Paramount had bought Beck and Woods 's spec script .
The studio hired Krasinski to rewrite the script and direct the film , which was his third directorial credit and his first for a major studio .
Krasinski cited cinematic influences including Alien ( 1979 ) , No Country for Old Men ( 2007 ) , and In the Bedroom ( 2001 ) when writing a new draft .
Initially , Blunt did not want to be cast in the film but after reading it on a plane , she immediately told her husband , " I need to do it . "
He agreed , and they were both cast in the starring roles .
FILMING Section::::Filming .
Production took place from May to November 2017 in Dutchess and Ulster counties in upstate New York .
Filmmakers spent their budget locally , including a purchase of of corn , which they hired local farmers to grow .
Some filming took place on a soundstage in the town of Pawling in Dutchess County , as well as on - location in the county 's city of Beacon .
Filming also took place on the Wallkill Valley Rail Trail in New Paltz of Ulster County , using the Springtown Truss Bridge .
Outside Dutchess and Ulster counties , filming took place on Main Street in Little Falls in Herkimer County , New York .
SOUND AND MUSIC Section::::Sound and music .
During filming , the crew avoided making noise so diegetic synchronized sounds ( e.g. , the sound of rolling dice on a game board ) could be recorded ; the sounds were amplified in post - production .
A traditional musical score was also added , which Krasinski justified in wanting audiences to remain familiar with watching a mainstream film , and not feel like part of a " silence experiment . "
Supervising sound editors Erik Aadahl and Ethan Van der Ryn worked on A Quiet Place .
For scenes from the perspective of the deaf daughter , sound was removed to put greater focus on the visual .
They also advised on organizing shots to reflect the creatures ' perspective , like showing them noticing a sound , then showing what was causing the sound .
Composer Marco Beltrami provided the sound editors music to work with in a way that would not interfere with the sound design throughout the film .
In the film , creatures are blind and communicate through clicking sounds .
Aadahl and Van der Ryn said they were inspired by animal echolocation , such as that employed by bats .
The sound of feedback , normally avoided by sound editors , was woven into the story at a loudness level that would not bother audiences too much .
USE OF SIGN LANGUAGE Section::::Use of sign language .
Because the characters communicate in American Sign Language to avoid making sound , filmmakers hired deaf mentor Douglas Ridloff to teach ASL to the actors and to be available to make corrections .
The filmmakers also hired an ASL interpreter for deaf actress Simmonds , so that spoken and signed language could be interpreted back and forth on set .
Simmonds , who is growing up with ASL , helped teach her fellow actors to sign .
She said of the need to practice ASL , " In the movie , we 've been signing together for years and years .
So it should look fluent .
"
She observed that the way the others used their sign language reflected their characters ' motivations ; the father had short and brief signs that showed his survival mentality , while the mother had more expressive signs as part of her wanting her children to experience more than survival .
Krasinski said Simmonds 's character was " a little bit of the warrior princess , the black sheep in the family , " and that she used " signing
that 's very defiant , it 's very teenage defiant . "
Simmonds said that for a scene in which her character fights with her father in sign language , she suggested for the daughter to rebel rather than cower as in the script .
She also said that at the end of the film , the script originally had the father sign to his daughter , " I love you , " but she suggested for him to follow with " I 've always loved you " to make up for their arguing earlier in the film , which prompted Krasinski to cry .
The producers Andrew Form and Bradley Fuller said they initially planned not to provide on - screen subtitles for sign - language dialogue with " context clues , " but realized that for the scene in which the deaf daughter and her hearing father argue about the modified hearing aid , subtitles were necessary .
The producers subsequently added subtitles for all sign - language dialogue in the film .
Producer Brad Fuller said , "
And I think once you put one subtitle in , you subtitle the whole movie .
You do n't take liberties like , '
Oh they probably know what I love you is , but we do n't subtitle it . '
It 's just gon na live everywhere and that 's the world we live by . "
CREATURE DESIGN Section::::Creature design .
Production designer Jeffrey Beecroft headed the creature design , and Industrial Light & Magic created the creatures , led by visual effects supervisor Scott Farrar .
The director wanted the creatures to look like they had evolved to no longer need eyes , and to be " somewhat humanoid " in nature .
Farrar said the initial creature design showed them with rhinoceros - like horns out of their faces , later redesigned .
Vanity Fair reported , " The team immediately set about pulling references ; prehistoric fish , black snakes , and bats , particularly their movement patterns .
Inspiration was also drawn from bog people : cadavers that have been mummified in peat , turning the skin black and giving it a sagging , leathery look . "
MARKETING Section::::Marketing .
Paramount Pictures released the first trailer for A Quiet Place in November 2017 .
It aired a 30-second commercial for the film during the US football playoff Super Bowl LII on February 4 , 2018 .
Of the seven trailers that aired during the playoff , A Quiet Place and Red Sparrow were shown during the pregame and had the lowest views and social conversations .
A Quiet Place had 149,000 views on YouTube , 275,000 views on Facebook , and 2,900 social conversations .
On February 12 , 2018 , Krasinski appeared on The Ellen DeGeneres Show to present the full trailer for A Quiet Place .
RELEASE PREMIERE
Section::::Release .
Section::::Premiere .
A Quiet Place premiered at the South by Southwest Film Festival as the opening - night film on , 2018 .
It was selected from 2,458 submissions , and earned " raves " from critics , according to IndieWire .
Following its premiere , the film experienced social media growth to under views across multiple platforms , outpacing Get Out ( 2017 ) , which had views .
BOX OFFICE
FORECAST Section::::Box office forecast .
The Tracking Board reported on , " The stellar reviews out of SXSW , coupled with the fact that there is n't anything like it in the marketplace , should help it stand out among its bigger - budget competition . "
Deadline Hollywood said on that the film was projected to gross around $ 20 million in its opening weekend .
Variety reported on that the film " is tracking to open between " and , which reached a basement of low-$20 million by the week of its release .
BoxOffice initially estimated on , 2018 that A Quiet Place would gross in its opening weekend , and that it would gross a total of in the United States .
By , it increased its estimate to an opening weekend gross of and a US total gross of .
The magazine said the film 's trailer was well - received online and that it appeared frequently in previews for .
BoxOffice wrote , " The horror genre has also shown a knack for over - performing against expectations at the box office in recent years , setting this release up for potential success . "
It added that A Quiet Place would have to compete against another horror film , Truth or Dare , which would be released the following weekend .
The magazine 's staff drew " very favorable " comparisons between A Quiet Place and the 2016 films 10 Cloverfield Lane and Do n't Breathe .
THEATRICAL RUN Section::::Theatrical run .
A Quiet Place was first commercially released in theaters in the first week of April 2018 in multiple territories , including North America .
A Quiet Place has grossed $ 188 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 152.7 million in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 340.7 million .
Paramount Pictures released the film in in the United States and Canada on , 2018 , alongside Blockers , Chappaquiddick , and The Miracle Season .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B+ " on an A+ to F scale , while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave it an 81 % overall positive score and a 63 % " definite recommend " .
The film made $ 19 million on its first day ( including $ 4.3 million from Thursday night previews at ) , increasing weekend projections to $ 47 million .
Unlike most horror films , which are front - loaded on Friday and suffer drops the rest of the weekend , A Quiet Place made $ 19.1 million on Saturday .
It went on to debut to $ 50.2 million , topping the box office and marking the biggest opening for a Paramount film since Star Trek Beyond in July 2016 .
To that point , it was second biggest domestic debut of 2018 , behind Black Panther .
The film made $ 32.9 million in its second weekend , dropping 34 % ( better than the 50+% that horror films normally see ) and finishing second at the box office , behind newcomer Rampage ( $ 35.7 million ) .
The hold represented the second - best - ever second weekend for a scary movie behind It .
The film regained the top spot the following week , grossing $ 20.9 million ( a 36 % drop ) , but dropped back down to second place the following weekend behind newcomer with $ 10.7 million .
Through its first two weeks of international release , the film had made $ 51.7 million , with its top markets being the United Kingdom ( $ 9.2 million ) , Mexico ( $ 5.1 million ) , Australia ( $ 4.6 million ) , Brazil ( $ 3.9 million ) , Indonesia ( $ 3.4 million ) , the Philippines ( $ 2.7 million ) and Taiwan ( $ 1.9 million ) .
It also debuted to $ 2.2 million in Russia , the biggest - ever opening for a Paramount horror film in the country .
In its third weekend overseas , it dip only 37 % for a $ 15 million from 57 markets .
In its fourth weekend in international markets , it grossed $ 6.6 million .
As of May 20 , 2018 , the film 's largest markets were United Kingdom ( $ 16.3 million ) , Australia ( $ 9.3 million ) , Mexico ( $ 7.5 million ) and Brazil ( $ 6.9 million ) .
The film was released in China on May 18 and made $ 17.7 million from 8,731 screens in its opening weekend .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 95 % based on 324 reviews , and an average rating of 8.2/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " A Quiet Place artfully plays on elemental fears with a ruthlessly intelligent creature feature that 's as original as it is scary – and establishes director John Krasinski as a rising talent . "
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 82 out of 100 , based on 55 critics , indicating " universal acclaim " .
Writing for Rolling Stone , Peter Travers gave the film 3.5 out of 4 stars , saying , " The question Krasinski tackles is what defines a family and what 's needed to preserve it ? '
Who are we ' , asks Mom , ' if we ca n't protect our children ? '
The answers are worked out with satisfying complexity and genuine feeling , proving indeed that home is where family is .
This new horror classic will fry your nerves to a frazzle . "
The Hollywood Reporters John DeFore described the film as " a terrifying thriller with a surprisingly warm heart " and said , " You might have to go back to Jeff Nichols ' 2011 Take Shelter to find a film that has used the fantastic this well to convey the combination of fear and responsibility a good parent feels . "
Varietys Owen Gleiberman said , " A Quiet Place is a tautly original genre - bending exercise , technically sleek and accomplished , with some vivid , scary moments , though it 's a little too in love with the stoned logic of its own premise . "
Michael Phillips of the Chicago Tribune gave the film 2.5 out of 4 stars and said , " My favorite moment , an encounter between Regan and one of the monsters in a cornfield , plays with sound and image and tension , creatively .
Other bits are more shameless ...
I do n't know if I 'd call A Quiet Place enjoyable ; it 's more grueling than cathartic . "
Horror author Stephen King praised the film in a tweet , " A QUIET PLACE is an extraordinary piece of work .
Terrific acting , but the main thing is the SILENCE , and how it makes the camera 's eye open wide in a way few movies manage . "
Nick Allen of RogerEbert.com called A Quiet Place " Krasinski 's breakthrough as a triple - threat entertainer , but it 's been a long time coming ...
By no accident , he 's tackled the horror genre while relying on the unique strength that can be seen throughout his acting work , and one that has made him relatable as an everyman across TV and film — expressive silence . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
!
scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Date of ceremony ! scope="col
" Category ! scope="col " Recipient(s ) and nominee(s ) ! scope="col " Result ! scope="col " class="unsortable
" ! scope="row " American Film Institute !
scope="row " rowspan="3 " Critics ' Choice Movie Awards !
scope="row
" Golden Globe Awards !
scope="row
" Hollywood Film Awards !
scope="row " Hollywood Music in Media Awards ! scope="row " MTV Movie & TV Awards !
scope="row " National Board of Review A Quiet Place !
scope="row " rowspan="4 " People 's Choice Awards ! scope="row " rowspan="4 " San Diego Film Critics SocietySatellite Awards ! scope="row " Screen Actors Guild Awards ! scope="row " Teen Choice Awards COMMENTARY AND THEMES Section::::Commentary and themes .
Speaking of the political and social commentary the film encouraged , Krasinski said , " The best compliment you can get on any movie is that it starts a conversation .
The fact that people are leaving and talking about anything is really fun — but certainly about deep stuff like that , is awesome . "
Krasinski , who did not grow up with horror films , said that prior films of the genre such as Do n't Breathe ( 2016 ) and Get Out ( 2017 ) that had societal commentary were part of his research .
In addition to considering his film a metaphor for parenthood , he compared the premise to US politics in 2018 , " I think in our political situation , that 's what 's going on now : You can close your eyes and stick your head in the sand , or you can try to participate in whatever 's going on . "
He cited Jaws ( 1975 ) as an influence , with how the protagonist police officer moved from New York to an island to avoid frightening situations , and was forced to encounter one in his new location with shark attacks .
Matthew Monagle of Film School Rejects said A Quiet Place seemed to be " the early frontrunner for the sparsely intellectual horror movie of the year " , like previous films
The Babadook ( 2014 ) and The Witch ( 2015 ) .
Monagle said Krasinski , who had directed two previous films , was " making an unusual pivot into a genre typically reserved for newcomers " , and considered it to be part of a movement toward horror films layered " in storytelling , [ with ] character beats not typically found in a horror movie " .
Tatiana Tenreyro , writing for Bustle , said while A Quiet Place was not a silent film , " It is the first of its kind within the modern horror genre for how little spoken dialogue it actually has . "
She said the rare moments of spoken dialogue " give depth to this horror movie , showing how the narrative defies the genre 's traditional films even further " .
Bishop Robert Barron was surprised by strikingly religious themes in the film .
He likened the family 's primitive , agrarian life of silence to monasticism , and commends their self - giving love .
Barron noted the pervasive pro - life themes , especially in the choices of the parents , as Mrs. Abbott risks everything to give birth to a child , and her husband lays down his own life so that the children can live : what Barron sees as the ultimate expression of parental love .
Sonny Bunch of the Washington Post also commented and expanded on a pro - life message .
Krasinski , who had recently become a father , said in a conference interview " I was already in a state of terror about whether or not I was a good enough father , " and added that the meaning of parenthood had been elevated for him by imagining being a father in a nightmare world , struggling to simply keep his children alive .
Jonathan Hetterly , writing in Shrinktank , saw the film 's whole premise as a commentary on modern American paranoid parenting , saying that Krasinski " viewed the premise as a metaphor for a parent 's worst fears " .
Krasinski himself has told CBS News " The scares were secondary to how powerful this could be as an allegory or metaphor for parenthood .
For me , this is all about parenthood . "
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
A Quiet Place was released on Digital HD on June 26 , 2018 , and on Ultra HD Blu - ray , Blu - ray and DVD on July 10 , 2018 .
SEQUEL
Section::::Sequel .
In April 2018 , Paramount Chair and CEO Jim Gianopulos said a sequel to the film was " in the works " .
Screenwriters Woods and Beck had previously stated that they had begun thinking of ideas and set pieces for a possible second film .
In August 2018 , Paramount scheduled the film for a May 15 , 2020 release date , with Krasinski returning to write the script , Platinum Dunes producers Bay , Form and Fuller returning to produce it , and Emily Blunt reprising her role .
In November 2018 , in a interview , Krasinski said the sequel " would not be a sequel to the first film " , and " would focus on other people trying to survive the hearing monsters " .
SEE ALSO
* Apocalyptic and post - apocalyptic fiction
* List of films featuring the deaf and hard of hearing * List of horror films of 2018
* Sign - language media
* Supernatural horror film Section::::See also .
Films with little or no dialogue
The British Film Institute listed the following noteworthy films with little or no dialogue : * The Thief ( 1952 )
* Les Vacances de Monsieur Hulot ( 1953 ) * The Naked Island ( 1960 )
* Le Bal ( 1983 ) * The Bear ( 1988 ) * The Triplets of Belleville ( 2003 ) *
In the City of Sylvia ( 2007 )
* Le quattro volte ( 2010 )
*
All Is Lost ( 2013 )
* Moebius ( 2013 )
* The Tribe ( 2014 )
*
The Red Turtle ( 2016 )
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS