OPERATION FINALE Operation Finale is a 2018 American historical drama film directed by Chris Weitz , from a screenplay by Matthew Orton .
The film stars Oscar Isaac ( who also produced ) , Ben Kingsley , Lior Raz , Mélanie Laurent , Nick Kroll , and Haley Lu Richardson , and follows the efforts of Israeli intelligence officers to capture former SS officer Adolf Eichmann in 1960 .
Several source materials , including Eichmann in My Hands , a memoir by Israeli officer Peter Malkin , provided the basis for the story .
Principal photography began in Argentina in October 2017 .
The film was theatrically released in the United States on August 29 , 2018 , and received mixed reviews from critics .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
On Christmas Eve in 1944 , SS - Obersturmbannführer Adolf Eichmann ( Kingsley ) flees the Eastern Front to Berlin to coordinate the destruction of documents related to Department B4 , going into hiding after the war ends .
In Buenos Aires , Sylvia Hermann ( Haley Lu Richardson ) begins courting Klaus Eichmann ( Joe Alwyn ) .
Klaus meets Sylvia and her German - Jewish father , Lothar ( Peter Strauss ) at home .
Klaus speaks of his father 's service with the SS but tells Lothar that he had died on the Eastern Front , and that he has been raised by his uncle , Ricardo .
Suspicious , Lothar passes this information to West German prosecutor - general Fritz Bauer .
Bauer , suspecting Klaus ' uncle may in fact be Adolf Eichmann , relays this intelligence to Mossad director Isser Harel ( Lior Raz ) in Tel Aviv , but Harel is unwilling to devote resources to investigate .
At the insistence of Rafi Eitan ( Nick Kroll ) , Harel dispatches field agent Zvi Aharoni ( Michael Aronov ) to Buenos Aries to begin reconnaissance .
At a dinner party celebrating Argentina 's 150th anniversary of independence from Spain , Klaus introduces Sylvia to Carlos Fuldner , a former Nazi officer who assisted with SS members escape to Argentina .
Fuldner addresses the guests with anti - Semitic rhetoric invoking the Hitlergrüsse , leaving Sylvia visibly disturbed , who promptly leaves .
Working in coordination with Mossad , Sylvia meets the Eichmann family at their home on Garibaldi Street to apologize for her earlier actions , and after an uncomfortable exchange between Klaus and his father , who introduced himself to Sylvia as Herr Klement , departs .
Eichmann is subsequently photographed by Aharoni 's assistant and intelligence of the exchange between Sylvia and the Eichmann family is relayed back to Israel , including information on how Klaus referred to Eichmann as " Father " .
Eitan summons Mossad agent Peter Malkin ( Oscar Issac ) and briefs him on the operation to capture Eichmann and to bring him to Israel , to stand trial for war crimes .
Unconvinced of his ability to gather intelligence on his own , Eitan and Harel chastise Malkin for a botched capture that resulted in the death of another Nazi in Austria in 1954 that they believed to be Eichmann .
Malkin persuades Harel the operation would be successful if Eichmann were captured and extracted by airplane on board an El Al flight , under the cover of a diplomatic mission during the Argentinian anniversary .
Harel agrees to proceed with the operation after medical doctor Hanna ( Mélanie Laurent ) is convinced to join the team .
After briefing on intelligence collected by Aharoni , Harel dispatches the team to Buenos Aires , who arrive on 1 May 1960 .
The capture team , compromised of both Mossad and Shin Bet agents , begin surveillance , with Malkin determining Eichmann to be a creature of habit .
Harel approves the capture on 7 May , with the team to capture Eichmann while on his way home from work .
The team executes the plan on 11 May , with Malkin capturing Eichmann outside his home , and subsequently extracted to a Mossad safe house .
In the scuffle , Eichmann loses his glasses .
Klaus investigates the commotion after the capture team flees and finds his father 's glasses .
When approached by Carlos on who knew Eichmann 's true identity , Klaus realizes Sylvia or her father may have been involved .
As Eichmann 's identity is confirmed at the safe house , the Israeli embassy is notified that Lothar Hermann was arrested and the police subsequently identify him as Josef Mengele .
Meanwhile , the capture team is informed by the transport plane 's company ( El - Al ) that they will only transport Eichman if he is to sign that he will voluntarily travel to Israel to stand trial .
Knowing Hermann 's arrest was a ruse to encourage Eichmann 's release , Harel orders Aharoni get Eichmann to sign the document to depart Argentina voluntarily .
Eichmann , who refuses to interact with Aharoni , also refuses to sign the waiver .
In contrast , Eichmann attempts to bond with Malkin during his watch and is able to further persuade Eichmann to sign the agreement requested .
As Klaus and Carlos investigate further , they recover a sketch Eichmann drew of Aharoni 's assistant who photographed him , which is relayed to the local police for additional assistance .
Pressure grows against the capture team with the airline departure days away , and authorities now searching the nearby neighborhoods for Eichmann .
With time running out , and despite Aharoni 's disapproval of Malkin 's methods , including disclosing his own name to his prisoner and providing comforts , he is successful in breaking Eichmann , who subsequently signs the waiver .
At the same time , a Nazi sympathizer working at the safe house provides information on the capture team to the police , and Carlos has Graciela brutally beaten to reveal where Eichmann is being held .
Disturbed at her treatment , Klaus is able to persuade Graciela into providing information on his father 's location .
As the safe house is scrubbed and Eichmann is loaded , Eitan volunteers to stay behind due to a lack of room in the car for the trip to the airport .
Klaus arrives at the safe house too late , and they make way for the airport .
At a security checkpoint , a security guard with the photograph of Aharoni 's assistant notifies the police , and the flight is subsequently delayed due to an issue with the flight permit .
With Carlos , Klaus and local police en route to stop the flight , Malkin rushes to air traffic control with their flight permit in hand , to ensure the plane takes off without issue .
Malkin subsequently remains behind and catches a separate flight home , while the capture team tearfully embraces and congratulates each other on the operation .
In the closing scenes of the film , Israeli Prime Minister David Ben - Gurion announces over radio that Adolf Eichmann has been captured and will stand trial in Israel .
Eichmann is visited by his wife Vera while in prison , and Klaus flies the flag of Nazi Germany over their home in protest .
Footage of various Nazi war crimes is played during the opening statements by the prosecution .
As Malkin leaves the trial , Eitan remarks they will not be remembered through recorded history for who they were , only for what they accomplished .
The closing credits recap the outcome of the trial itself , overlaid with live footage and images of testimony from Holocaust survivors .
On 1 June , 1962 , Adolf Eichmann was executed by hanging , having been found guilty of transporting millions of people to their deaths .
He was cremated in an oven built for the occasion , and his ashes spread in the Mediterranean Sea , so that he might have no final place of rest .
The trial was televised globally .
It was the first time that eyewitness testimony of the Holocaust was seen by the world .
Malkin kept the mission secret from his mother until she lay on her deathbed , and Malkin himself died in 2005 , survived by his wife and three children .
CAST PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On November 16 , 2015 , it was announced that Metro - Goldwyn - Mayer had bought an untitled spec script from Matthew Orton , about the team who found and captured Adolf Eichmann .
Brian Kavanaugh - Jones co - produced the film through his production company Automatik .
On February 24 , 2016 , Chris Weitz was reported as being in talks to direct the film .
A deal was struck in March 2017 that saw Oscar Isaac co - produce and star in the film , taking on the role of Peter Malkin .
Chris Weitz was set as director .
In June , Ben Kingsley was cast as Adolf Eichmann .
In August , Lior Raz joined the production , and in September , Mélanie Laurent , Nick Kroll , Joe Alwyn , Michael Aronov , and Haley Lu Richardson were cast , with filming to begin in Argentina on October 1 .
The cast was rounded out on October 12 , and filming was underway in Argentina .
Peter Strauss also joined the cast , on November 30 .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Operation Finale was originally scheduled to be released on September 14 , 2018 .
However , in July 2018 , the film was moved up to August 29 , 2018 in the U.S. , due to high test screening scores , and to avoid the crowded September field .
The film was released outside of the United States on October 3 , 2018 , by Netflix .
The film will be released on Blu - Ray and Digital HD on December 4 , 2018 by Universal Pictures Home Entertainment , under a new home video distribution deal with MGM .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
In the United States , Operation Finale was projected to gross $ 8–10 million from 1,810 theaters during its four - day Labor Day opening weekend .
The film made $ 1 million on its first day and $ 725,891 on its second .
It went on to gross $ 6 million over Friday to Sunday , for a four - day weekend total of $ 7.8 million , and a six - day total of $ 9.5 million , finishing fifth at the box office .
In its second weekend , the film dropped 50 % to $ 3 million , finishing eighth .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an audience approval rating of 69 % , and a critic approval rating of 59 % based on 116 reviews .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Operation Finale is well - intentioned , well - acted , and overall entertaining , even if the depth and complexity of the real - life events depicted can get a little lost in their dramatization . "
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 58 out of 100 , based on 33 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A – " on an A+ to F scale , while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave it an 86 % positive score and a 65 % " definite recommend " .
In his review for The Hollywood Reporter , John DeFore called the film " a lively historical thriller " and wrote , " Though not likely to enter the pantheon as either a true - life caper ( Argos people - smuggling was more exciting ; Munichs tale of vengeance more affecting ) or as a showcase for face - the - past mind games , the drama benefits from a strong cast and can easily replace 1996 's The Man Who Captured Eichmann as the go - to dramatization of this episode . "
SEE ALSO
* Eichmann in Jerusalem
* Shin Bet REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Official website
* Excerpt from Eichmann in My Hands by Peter Malkin at The Archive