DESIGNATED SURVIVOR ( SEASON 2 )
The second season of the American political drama series Designated Survivor was ordered on May 11 , 2017 .
It premiered on September 27 , 2017 , and consisted of 22 episodes .
The series is produced by ABC Studios and The Mark Gordon Company , and is filmed in Toronto and Cambridge , Ontario , Canada .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
One year into office , President Thomas Kirkman juggles searching for the mastermind behind the attack on the Capitol Building , dealing with the day - to - day situations that take place at home and abroad , and surviving attacks against his administration .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN * Kiefer Sutherland as President Thomas
" Tom " Kirkman * Natascha McElhone as First Lady Alexandra " Alex " Kirkman * Paulo Costanzo as White House Political Director Lyor Boone
* Adan Canto as National Security Advisor Aaron Shore *
Italia Ricci as White House Chief of Staff Emily Rhodes * LaMonica Garrett as United States Secret Service Advance Team Leader , Mike Ritter
* Zoe McLellan as White House Counsel Kendra Daynes
* Ben Lawson as Secret Intelligence Service ( MI6 )
Special Agent , Damian Rennett
* Kal Penn as White House Press Secretary
Seth Wright
* Maggie Q as Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) Special Agent ,
Hannah Wells
RECURRING
* Terry Serpico as Patrick Lloyd * Jake Epstein as Chuck Russink * Mckenna Grace as Penny Kirkman * Reed Diamond as FBI Director John Forstell
* Geoff Pierson as Secretary of State Cornelius Moss *
Mykelti Williamson as Vice Chairman Admiral Chernow
* Kim Raver as Andrea Frost * Nora Zehetner as Valeria Poriskova
GUEST
* Bonnie Bedelia as Eva Booker * Breckin Meyer as Trey Kirkman
* Michael J. Fox as Ethan West * Aunjanue Ellis as Mayor , later Vice President Ellenor Darby EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Designated Survivor was renewed for a second season on May 11 , 2017 .
Former The Good Wife executive producer Keith Eisner will take over as showrunner for the second season .
Eisner will be the fourth showrunner for the show , replacing Jeff Melvoin , who was hired as showrunner in December 2016 , taking over for Jon Harmon Feldman .
The show 's original showrunner Amy B. Harris stepped down due to creative differences after the series ' official pickup in February 2016 .
On June 22 , 2017 , cast member Virginia Madsen announced that she would not be returning for the second season as Kimble Hookstraten as she commented " I guess they had other stories to tell .
It 's a big show
so I wish them well .
"
After the first season finale , Sutherland announced that the show would add three new characters for the second season .
Two of the character descriptions was " a " fiery " female White House Counsel and a " ruggedly handsome " MI6 operative who crosses paths with Hannah . "
TVLine announced on June 29 , 2017 , that Paulo Costanzo had been cast as a series regular role as Lyor Boone , the new White House Political Director .
Deadline reported on July 17 , 2017 , that Ben Lawson had been cast as the series regular character Damian Rennett , an MI6 operative .
In the same month , it was announced that Zoe McLellan was cast in a series regular role as attorney and White House counsel , Kendra Daynes .
In November 2017 , Kim Raver was cast in the recurring role of engineer and space entrepreneur , Andrea Frost .
In January 2018 , Michael J. Fox was cast in the recurring role of Washington attorney and special prosecutor , Ethan West .
In March 2018 , Nora Zehetner was cast in the recurring role of Russian cultural attaché , Valeria Poriskova .
RATINGS REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS