EXTINCTION ( 2018 FILM )
Extinction is a 2018 American science fiction thriller film directed by Ben Young and written by Spenser Cohen , Eric Heisserer and Brad Kane .
The film is about a father who has a recurring dream / vision about the loss of his family while witnessing a force bent on destruction .
The film stars Lizzy Caplan , Michael Peña , Mike Colter , Lilly Aspell , Emma Booth , Israel Broussard , and Lex Shrapnel .
It was released on Netflix on July 27 , 2018 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Peter , an engineer , has recurring nightmares in which he and everyone he knows suffer through violent , alien invasion - like confrontations with an unknown enemy .
He reluctantly visits a clinic to receive psychiatric help , only to find a patient there who reveals that he is having the same visions , prompting Peter to believe his visions are of an upcoming invasion .
That night , invading spaceships open fire on the city , causing significant damage .
Peter and his wife Alice barricade their apartment amid the sounds of slaughter from ground troops .
A soldier dressed in insectoid - looking armor breaks through anyway and finds Lucy , one of their two daughters , hiding underneath a table .
The soldier pauses to examine her long enough to allow Peter and Alice to attack .
Peter and his family then escape with the soldier 's rifle .
Based on his visions , Peter and his family agree that the factory he works at is a safe spot .
He is able to bypass the rifle 's biometric authentication and kill soldiers guarding the apartment building 's exit .
They make their way to a tunnel entrance to safely travel to the factory , but not before Alice is injured from a bomb blast .
As they regroup , the soldier from their apartment appears , having tracked them with a homing signal on the rifle they took .
To Peter 's shock , the soldier removes his helmet and appears human .
Peter forces the soldier to carry Alice to the factory .
There , his boss , David , explains that the invasion has been expected for many years .
A medic examines Alice but informs Peter that he can not save her .
As David 's men drag the invading soldier off to execute him , he yells to Peter that he can save Alice .
Peter agrees to stay with the soldier to save Alice ; David will evacuate their children to a subway station where a transport train awaits to take them all to an offsite base .
The soldier surprises Peter by revealing that Alice is an synthetic ( AI ) .
To save Alice , she needs an alternate source of power : Peter himself .
At the soldier 's guidance , Peter cuts open his own chest with a pocket knife , confirming that he is also an synthetic .
The soldier connects a cable between the two androids and Peter passes out , experiencing in detail what he had thought were visions of the future but are actually memories of a past war .
Fearing that android workers ( " synthetics " ) might rise up against humans , the military attack unarmed synthetics .
The synthetics fight back and eventually drive all humans off the whole planet .
In order to deal with the guilt of what they have done and prevent themselves from living in fear of a reprisal from humans , the synthetics have wiped their memories out and lived normal lives .
Peter wakes up and the soldier , Miles , explains that humans have been living on Mars for 50 years .
He had expected the synths to be monsters , not families with children .
Peter and Alice part amicably with Miles to find their daughters as humans breach the roof of the factory .
As they all depart on the train , David explains that he and a handful of other synthetics kept their memories to stay prepared for the inevitable return of the humans .
Peter suggests that some day there could be peace between humans and synthetics .
CAST
* Michael Peña as Peter * Lizzy Caplan as Alice , Peter 's wife * Mike Colter as David , Peter 's boss * Amelia Crouch as Hanna , Alice and Peter 's daughter * Erica Tremblay as Lucy , Alice and Peter 's daughter * Israel Broussard as Miles , a soldier
* Lex Shrapnel as Ray , Samantha 's husband * Emma Booth as Samantha , Ray 's wife
* Lilly Aspell as Megan , Ray and Samantha 's daughter PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In December 2013 , it was revealed that the screenplay for Extinction , written by Spenser Cohen , had been included in the 2013 Black List of the year 's best unproduced scripts in Hollywood , as voted on by more than 250 studio execs .
In January 2014 , Joe Johnston signed on to direct the film , and in September 2016 , it was revealed that James McAvoy was " in talks " to star .
In October 2016 , Ben Young signed on to direct the film , with Johnston having left the project a while back .
In January 2017 , it was announced that Michael Peña would star in the role McAvoy had been courted for .
In February 2017 , Universal Pictures won worldwide distribution rights to the film , with principal production set to begin in April 2017 .
In March 2017 , Lizzy Caplan and Israel Broussard joined the cast , while Mike Colter and Lex Shrapnel joined in April , and Emma Booth in May. RELEASE Section::::Release .
Extinction was released on July 27 , 2018 , on Netflix .
The film had originally been scheduled for a theatrical release on January 26 , 2018 , by Universal Pictures , but was pulled from the release schedule .
Later in February 2018 , it was reported that Netflix had acquired the film from Universal .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 40 % based on 20 reviews , and an average rating of 4/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Extinction has a few intriguing ideas , but they -- and some game performances from its talented stars -- are lost in the movie 's muddled plot and frustrating pacing . "
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 37 out of 100 , based on 5 critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews " .
Jake Nevins of The Guardian gave it 2/5 stars and called the film " a competent , if formulaic film " , writing that , by virtue of not being viewed theatrically , the film 's flaws are magnified and its strengths were weakened .
In his 1.5/4 star review for RogerEbert.com , Nick Allen wrote " There 's a tightness that I respect with Extinction .
It 's not so much a thrill - ride but a movie monorail , with one revelation at the end meant to reconsider the entire journey .
That speaks to its efficiency as the latest in mindless , if not attention - less Netflix movies .
Extinction does n't seek to be much , but it 's just not all that charming , either . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS