GOTHAM ( SEASON 4 )
The fourth season of the American television series Gotham , based on characters from DC Comics related to the Batman franchise , revolves around the characters of James Gordon and Bruce Wayne .
The season is produced by Primrose Hill Productions , DC Entertainment , and Warner Bros. Television , with Bruno Heller , Danny Cannon , and John Stephens serving as executive producers .
The season was inspired and adapted elements from the comic book storylines of , , and .
The subtitle for the season is A Dark Knight .
The season was ordered in May 2017 , and production began the following month .
Ben McKenzie stars as Gordon , alongside Donal Logue , David Mazouz , Morena Baccarin , Sean Pertwee , Robin Lord Taylor , Erin Richards , Camren Bicondova , Cory Michael Smith , Jessica Lucas , Chris Chalk , Drew Powell , Crystal Reed and Alexander Siddig .
The fourth season premiered on September 21 , 2017 , on Fox , while the second half premiered on March 1 , 2018 .
The season concluded on May 17 , 2018 .
The season received positive reviews from critics and audiences , who cited the character development , writing and action sequences as highlights of the season , with some calling it the best season yet .
The premiere was watched by 3.21 million viewers with a 1.0 in the 18–49 demo , which was a 17 % decline from the previous season premiere but on par with last season 's average .
Despite remaining with consistent ratings throughout the first half of the season , the second half experienced new series lows in the spring and being in danger of cancellation .
Despite the ratings drop , Fox renewed the show for a fifth and final season on May 13 , 2018 .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* Ben McKenzie as James Gordon * Donal Logue as Harvey Bullock
* David Mazouz as Bruce Wayne * Morena Baccarin as
Leslie " Lee " Thompkins * Sean Pertwee as Alfred Pennyworth
* Robin Lord Taylor as Oswald Cobblepot / Penguin * Erin Richards as Barbara Kean * Camren Bicondova as Selina Kyle
* Cory Michael Smith as Edward Nygma /
The Riddler * Jessica Lucas as Tabitha Galavan /
The Tigress
* Chris Chalk as Lucius Fox
* Drew Powell as Butch Gilzean / Cyrus Gold /
Solomon Grundy * Crystal Reed as Sofia Falcone * Alexander Siddig as Ra 's al Ghul RECURRING
* Anthony Carrigan as Victor Zsasz * Maggie Geha and Peyton List as Ivy Pepper * Andrew Sellon as Arthur Penn * Charlie Tahan and David W. Thompson as Jonathan Crane / The Scarecrow * Kelcy Griffin as Detective Vanessa Harper
* Nathan Darrow as Victor Fries /
Mr. Freeze * Marina Benedict as Cherry * Michael Cerveris as Lazlo Valentin /
Professor Pyg * Camila Perez and Michelle Veintimilla as
Bridgit Pike / Firefly * Christopher Convery as Martin
* Cameron Monaghan as Jerome Valeska and Jeremiah Valeska * Benedict Samuel as Jervis Tetch / Mad Hatter * J.W. Cortes as Detective Alvarez
GUEST
* Michael Maize as Grady Harris * Damian Young as Warden Reed
* Nico Bustamante as Orphan
* Michael Buscemi as Merton * Larry Pine as Mayor Burke
* John Doman as Carmine Falcone
* Ilana Becker as Myrtle Jenkins * Dakin Matthews as Niles Winthrop * Benjamin Stockham as Alex Winthrop
* Owen Harn as The Hunter * Anthony Rodriguez as Anubis
* Albert M. Chan as Pharmacist *
Will Janowitz as Wally Clarke * Gordon Winarick as Tommy Elliot * Samia Finnerty as Grace Blomdhal * Tommy Nelson as Brant Jones * Kyle Vincent Terry as Headhunter
* Stu " Large " Riley as Sampson * Thomas Lyons as Griffin Krank * Chris Perfetti as Cosmo Krank * Francesca Root - Dodson as Ecco * B. D. Wong as Hugo Strange
* Alison Fraser EPISODES Section::::Episodes .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
The show was officially renewed by Fox for a fourth season on May 10 , 2017 .
Just like the second and third seasons , the fourth season also carried a new subtitle for the season : A Dark Knight .
WRITING Section::::Writing .
The producers revealed that the season would be based on the comic book stories and .
According to executive producer John Stephens , the season would not consist of " direct adaptations " , but " loose interpretations " of the comic book series .
Ben McKenzie explained that the structure for the season would be " the beginning is more Long Halloween , our version of that , and the end is more Year One . "
According to Stephens , the show will handle a horror - oriented direction on the season : " At the very beginning of the season , Penguin has solidified his control upon Gotham like never before .
Where he 's kind of unionized crime .
And Scarecrow comes in to basically reintroduce fear into Gotham and to remind people that the dark is still scary out there .
And we 're really going to fashion , especially Episode 2 , almost a horror movie episode where we really get to see Scarecrow .
I think he 's like purely terrifying .
Imagine , rather than the other versions of Scarecrow out there — because there are a lot of different versions — what if you just really tell Scarecrow as a horror movie ?
Because he could be scary as hell .
" Executive producer Danny Cannon stated , " When the studio asks you to tone back because it 's too scary , you know you 've done something right ! "
Regarding Bruce 's beginning of vigilantism , McKenzie explained that " We are definitely leaning into Bruce , having learned some of the skills to be a vigilante , now actually attempting it .
Now , we have a long , long way to go before he can realistically be Batman , so there will be many stumbles and falls – and regressions back to being a kid at times – but Gordon will eventually become aware of what he 's doing and that will bring them against each other . "
David Mazouz also added , " Bruce really is taking on this vigilante persona and all the things that go along with that .
Whether it be creating another persona , a public persona , that 's also definitely going to be a major part of Bruce 's journey this year .
His relationship as this other person .
Batman is coming .
Absolutely .
" Mazouz also stated that he was worried the writers could pull back some aspects from Batman , deeming it " too fast " but he was glad it did n't stop .
He said that Bruce would take the " Batman persona " this season .
Cannon also explained that Bruce will be seen " as the emerging threat he is . "
Alexander Siddig stated that his character will seek to make Bruce his heir and will " do anything he can to get his hands on him , to manipulate him into what [ Ra 's ] wants him to be . "
He also claimed that the season is " a season so far of extremes . "
Talking about his character , McKenzie stated , " Comparatively , perhaps he 's in a better place than some of these other truly evil , evil people . "
But as the season will be with him dealing with Cobblepot , Gordon " does n't have a lot of good options .
He has to either fight him directly or find allies to fight Penguin — surrogates to fight Penguin — which leads him down a dark path .
So , that 's kind of the way we start for him in season 4 . "
According to Stephens , " We 're going to see Jim make , in some ways , big steps toward
I guess what you would call the commissionership .
But also we 're going to see Jim , in his quest to save the city , cross different ethical lines than he ever did before .
It 's going to bring him to an ethical nadir that we have n't seen him at , and it 's going to be told through the context of a relationship that he has with Sofia Falcone , the daughter of Don Falcone , who 's played by Crystal Reed this year .
And that 's going to be a really compelling and interesting relationship . "
Sean Pertwee also stated that the season will also explore Alfred 's mysterious past " indirectly " .
McKenzie made his writing debut on the episode " The Demon 's Head " , after previously directing the third - season episode " These Delicate and Dark Obsessions " .
McKenzie went to Los Angeles to work on the writers ' room to break the story and then go back to New York City and finish many drafts .
He explained , " I 've been fiddling around with writing for a long time , but I 'd never written an episode of television , so it was quite a learning process . "
He also added that , " From being on a set , the directing came fairly naturally .
It was challenging , but there were a lot of things that I understood about directing just from observing , just from watching director 's work .
Writing often takes place behind - the - scenes .
Physical production is not privy to how scripts come out ...
I was n't so familiar with that process of breaking a story , of starting with a story document , then an outline , and then a draft ; it was informative " .
For the second half of the season , Cameron Monaghan stated that " We 're borrowing very heavily from some of the most iconic Batman storylines .
I think that they 're deep enough , and they show where its really splitting that duality and start totally embracing the main arcs .
I think that we did a little bit in season three to bring it into . "
He also added that the plan for the final episodes is to adapt , stating , " We 're really getting into it this year .
I think the way that the story escalates is something that shifts and is not anything the show has done before .
I think it 's going to be a really unique experience .
Especially by the past few episodes , it 's going to be really ...
it 's pretty insane . "
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
With the exception of Benedict Samuel and Michael Chiklis , all main actors from the previous season returned for the show , with Maggie Geha being downgraded to guest star .
Crystal Reed joined the series in July 2017 in the series regular role of Sofia Falcone .
Alexander Siddig was promoted to the main cast .
In September 2017 , Michael Cerveris joined the show as Lazlo Valentin / Professor Pyg , in a multi - episode role .
Cerveris stated , " Professor Pyg is a brilliant and chameleon - like person who has a highly developed sense of what 's right and wrong — it just might not be a sense of right and wrong that corresponds with everybody else 's . "
He also added that , " When they [ the writers ] had somebody who played Sweeney Todd , they knew the direction they wanted to go ...
[ Broadway fans who do n't watch Gotham ] might give it a look simply because of that , and find that they have a new favorite show . "
Regarding the Dollotrons , Cerveris stated , " You know how much he 's liked the Pyg in the comics , but I would say that his focus in Gotham is more on things to do with Gotham and with the city and with Jim Gordon .
He 's certainly is the manipulative character , and certainly , you know , is trying to get people to do stuff whether they know why they 're doing it or not .
But , that 's sort of exclusive .
His whole reason for existing is not the Dollotrons . "
He described the character as having " a Hannibal Lecter - ish quality . "
He also jokingly added that he could n't eat bacon " because I just ca n't bring myself to eat my little friends . "
Donal Logue stated , " We have Michael Cerveris coming in and playing Professor Pyg and he 's such an incredibly gifted actor and , as happens a lot , the gentlest and most gifted of artistic souls can play the darkest , creepiest human beings known to literature or film . "
Besides , the character of Tommy Elliot was also set to return to the show , having appeared in the episode " The Mask " .
However , co - executive producer Bryan Wynbrandt added , " Obviously when Tommy Elliot is discussed , there 's always is that Hush storyline .
That is something that we 've discussed .
Right now , we 're kind of still feeling that out .
It could be something on the horizon , but I ca n't say for sure . "
Also , Peyton List was cast as a new iteration of Ivy Pepper .
According to Bryan Wynbrandt , " The change was all based on the idea that she 's continuing to evolve to become more of the Ivy from the comic books and what we really enjoyed .
In this third evolution you 're going to see a really self possessed , really scary and driven version of the Ivy character , who is intent on kind of making the world in the image she sees it should be , which is the green world .
The world where the plants rule and people are an after thought . "
As a concept McKenzie wished to explore , the fourth season is set to bring back the actor Charlie Tahan as Jonathan Crane / Scarecrow , who portrayed the character on the first - season episodes : " The Fearsome Dr. Crane " and " The Scarecrow " .
A trailer was screened on the 2017 San Diego Comic - Con that showed Crane donning a new costume under the Scarecrow persona .
McKenzie explained : " So we met his father Dr Crane in Season 1 .
So we 've taken our time ; we 're gon na come back now to his son .
You know , in circumstances probably not best described now , his son takes on his father 's mantle and becomes the fully - realized Scarecrow .
It 's great .
We 're able to use this sort of fear toxin that Scarecrow is able to summon .
We 're completely unafraid — or perhaps afraid but we still persist – in expanding the universe and our capabilities .
" Tahan commented on his character , " He 's sort of trying to build an army with this toxin .
Scarecrow might start brainwashing people .
I 'm not exactly sure what his endgame is
— I do n't even know if he knows .
He has this revelation that he does n't have to fear fear . "
However , due to Tahan 's commitment to the series Ozark , the role ended up recast with David W. Thompson , who portrayed him in the second half of the season .
When asked about Jerome Valeska 's return in the season , Stephens stated , " What I will say about Jerome is that Jerome is in Arkham right now , and when you think about Arkham 's record of keeping people locked up , we will probably see him again before the end of the year . "
In September 2017 , Stephens explained , " You 're totally gon na see him this year .
You 're gon na see him in a new position this year " , also teasing that Jerome would be an ally to Penguin on the season .
Ben McKenzie said , " Jerome is one of our most beloved characters .
The idea here was to really give the audience more time to enjoy and savor
[ Cameron Monaghan 's ] performance .
" Regarding the partnership between Jerome and Penguin , Robin Lord Taylor said " You have Jerome , who is chaos , and you have Oswald , who is control .
So you can imagine , there are ways that those can integrate , but at the same time they 're opposites . "
Stephens also added that Fish Mooney is " gone for good " , saying , " Now , that one was it .
At a certain point , you got ta say ' Definitely . '
People die at a certain point , and that 's the second or third time they die [ on Gotham ] " FILMING Section::::Filming .
Filming for the season began on June 20 , 2017 , at Steiner Studios in Brooklyn , New York .
In January 2018 , it was announced that Ben McKenzie would direct an episode after making his directional debut the previous season .
It was later revealed that he would be directing the 16th episode , titled " One of My Three Soups " .
Production on the season officially wrapped in late March 2018 .
RELEASE
BROADCAST Section::::Release .
Section::::Broadcast .
The season was originally set to air on September 28 , 2017 , on Fox in the United States .
However , on July 28 , 2017 , Fox decided to move up the premiere to September 21 , 2017 in order to give its companion newcomer series
The Orville a continuous run .
The fourth season is moving to a Thursday timeslot , alongside The Orville , after airing its past seasons on Mondays .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
In July 2017 , the cast and crew attended San Diego Comic - Con to discuss and promote the season , showing a five - minute sizzle reel from season 3 as well as the debut trailer for the season .
The second episode " The Fear Reaper " was screened on September 23 , 2017 , when Cannon , McKenzie , Taylor , Bicondova , Mazouz , Pertwee and Lucas promoted the series at the inaugural Tribeca TV Festival .
Besides , the cast will attend the New York Comic Con in October 2017 to promote the season as well as a Q&A presentation with the cast .
The season was also heavily marketed by trailers showcasing Bruce 's beginning of vigilantism as well as Jonathan Crane 's debut , both of whom received positive response from audience with Digital Spys Justin Hart commenting , " Sounds like a perfect time for young Bruce Wayne to finally embrace his destiny as a masked vigilante , does n't it ? "
while Albert Achar from IndieWire commented , " it looks like it is going to be a very wild ride . "
As part of promotion for the ninth episode " Let Them Eat Pie " , Fox released a " red band " trailer featuring Michael Cerveris as Professor Pyg , teasing a Sweeney Todd storyline in the episode as well as a musical number , which was considered by TV Guide as " insane .
" HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The season is set to be released on Blu - ray on August 21 , 2018 .
On August 15 , 2018 , the season was made available on Netflix UK and Ireland one month prior to its Region 2 DVD release .
RECEPTION RATINGS Section::::Reception .
Section::::Ratings .
The premiere was watched by 3.21 million viewers with a 1.0 in the 18–49 demo , which was a 17 % decline from the previous season premiere but on par with last season 's average .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported an 85 % approval rating with an average rating of 6.8/10 based on 13 reviews .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Nominee(s ) !
Result ! scope="col " class="unsortable " REFERENCES