CELEBRITY BIG BROTHER 1 ( U.S. ) Celebrity Big Brother , also known as Big Brother : Celebrity Edition , is a spin - off series of the American version of the Dutch reality television franchise Big Brother .
This season aired during the winter of the 2017–18 network television season on CBS and was the second U.S. Big Brother season to air outside the usual summer television season , the first being Big Brother 9 in 2008 .
Julie Chen returned as host , with Allison Grodner and Rich Meehan returning as executive producers .
The series is produced by Fly on the Wall Entertainment in association with Endemol Shine North America .
The first season premiered on February 7 , 2018 .
The promotional logo was released on December 20 , 2017 .
The logo is similar to that used for Big Brother 19 , with the word " celebrity " added .
The first teaser was also released the same day .
In January 2018 official photos of the house and backyard were released through a press release and an Instagram livestream with Julie Chen .
On January 28 , 2018 , the official cast was announced during The 60th Annual Grammy Awards .
The first season officially concluded on February 25 , 2018 when Marissa Jaret Winokur beat Ross Mathews by a final jury vote of 6 to 3 .
Ross was also later named America 's Favorite HouseGuest .
On May 12 , 2018 , CBS renewed the spin - off for a second season .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
After the first season of the British version of Big Brother proved to be a success in the ratings for Channel 4 , the network collaborated with the BBC for the first British season of Celebrity Big Brother in aid of Comic Relief .
The season ran for a condensed run of eight days and featured six British celebrities moving into the house used for the first British season .
Due to the success of the first celebrity edition , a second season was ordered and shown exclusively on Channel 4 in November 2002 .
The celebrity version took a two - year break before returning for its third season in 2005 , and became a regular staple alongside the regular British version .
Starting with the third season , the show began to feature celebrities outside the United Kingdom alongside well known British celebrities .
Many notable American celebrities have since taken part in the British version of Celebrity Big Brother .
American actor Gary Busey took part in the fourteenth season in the summer of 2014 and became the first American celebrity to win Celebrity Big Brother in the United Kingdom .
An American version of Celebrity Big Brother has been speculated since 2002 , along with a celebrity version of Survivor .
In an interview , Julie Chen and CBS CEO Leslie Moonves revealed talks of a celebrity edition of Big Brother as far back as Big Brother 2 .
It was rumored that CBS was looking to air a celebrity edition in the fall after Big Brother 3 with radio personality Howard Stern speculated as a possible houseguest .
Chen revealed that Paris Hilton had agreed to do it and Roseanne Barr initially agreed to take part , but then backed out .
Barr would later take part in another celebrity spin - off of Big Brother called in the United Kingdom in 2008 , where she watched over a group of non - celebrity housemates for a day , set tasks and talked to them in the Diary Room .
Julie Chen announced on September 7 , 2017 , during a live double eviction episode of Big Brother 19 that Celebrity Big Brother would air sometime during the winter , before the twentieth season of Big Brother in the summer of 2018 .
CBS later confirmed via a press release that Julie Chen would return to host the new season , and Allison Grodner and Rich Meehan will be executive producers .
The season will be produced by Fly on the Wall Entertainment in association with Endemol Shine North America .
On September 13 , 2017 , it was revealed by Chen that her husband , CBS chief executive Leslie Moonves , forced her to take a pay cut for the celebrity edition to happen .
Moonves stated , " You should n't be expected to be paid as if it 's a full series .
It 's a condensed version . "
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The format of the show remained similar to the American version of Big Brother .
Competitions for Head of Household and Power of Veto had been confirmed to returned for this edition along with live evictions .
On December 1 , 2017 , CBS revealed that the series would premiere on February 7 , 2018 and wrap on February 25 , 2018 .
SERIES CHANGES
Section::::Series changes .
Celebrity Big Brother was a condensed version of the game and would not last as long as a regular season of Big Brother , with episodes only shown over two weeks instead of three months .
Unlike the parent series Jury members were not sequestered separately and were allowed to return to the outside world as well as watch the show .
Beginning with an incident that led to a lawsuit in Big Brother 2 when HouseGuest Justin Sebik got drunk and threatened fellow HouseGuest Krista Stegall by holding a knife to her throat , there has been an alcohol restriction in the house .
The alcohol restriction was lifted for the Celebrity HouseGuests .
The space in the backyard was reduced to allow production to constantly perform construction for competitions but still allow 24/7 access for the HouseGuests .
For the celebrity version of America 's Favorite HouseGuest , the term Favorite Celebrity HouseGuest was also being used interchangeably .
For the first time since the beginning of the U.S. series , five players were featured in the season 's finale night versus the usual three .
BROADCASTS Section::::Broadcasts .
The main television coverage of Celebrity Big Brother was screened on CBS during the winter of the 2017–18 network television season .
CBS decided to schedule the spin - off during the February 2018 sweeps period to counterprogram NBC 's coverage of the 2018 Winter Olympics .
Episodes aired on Sundays , Mondays , Wednesdays , and Fridays with two special episodes on Thursday , February 8 and Saturday , February 24 .
Most episodes aired for one hour and aired from 8:00 - 9:00 p.m. EST ; the Friday episodes and the season finale , however , ran for two hours each ( from 8:00 - 10:00 p.m. EST ) .
The live Internet feeds returned for the American version of Celebrity Big Brother as part of CBS All Access .
Alongside the weekly shows on CBS , the companion series returned on Pop under the title .
The show provided live coverage nightly from inside the House .
INTERNATIONAL BROADCASTS
Section::::International broadcasts .
The series was screened in Canada on Global in simulcast with CBS .
The celebrity series is also the first American Big Brother season to be screened in Australia .
The program aired on the Nine Network 's secondary channel ; 9Go !
from the 11th of February and air 5 times a week ( Sundays to Thursdays )
with Sunday and Thursday episodes set to air at 8:30pm and with other episodes set to air at 9:30pm .
Additionally , episodes were made available to Australian viewers on Nine 's streaming service 9Now
the shortly after the American airing of the show .
However , low ratings saw the series bumped to a later timeslot on 9Go !
PRIZE Section::::Prize .
The HouseGuests competed for the main grand prize of $ 250,000 .
HOUSEGUESTS
Section::::HouseGuests .
The HouseGuests were revealed during a live pre - show of the 2018 Grammy AwardsBrandi Glanville 45 Former The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills star Chuck Liddell 48 Mixed martial artist , UFC Hall of Famer Calabasas , California James Maslow 27 Big Time Rush singer and actor Venice ,
California 38 Former The Cosby Show actress Atlanta ,
Georgia 45 Broadway actress Toluca Lake ,
California Mark McGrath 49 Singer and television host Studio City ,
California
38 Former NBA player Los Angeles , California Omarosa Manigault 44 Reality television star and former White House political aide
Jacksonville , Florida Ross Mathews 38 Television host Palm Springs ,
California
Shannon Elizabeth 44
Actress EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
NOTES VOTING HISTORY
Household !
Nominations
AriadnaBrandi
AriadnaOmarosa
AriadnaMarkRoss !
Veto Winner !
Nominations NOTES
VIEWING
FIGURES ( rating / share ) !
Viewers(millions ) !
Rank(timeslot ) !
Rank(night )
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS