YOUNG JUSTICE :
OUTSIDERS Young Justice : Outsiders is the third season of the American animated superhero series Young Justice , developed by Brandon Vietti and Greg Weisman .
The series follows the lives of teenage superheroes and sidekicks who are members of a covert operation group referred to simply as " The Team " , that acts as a young counterpart to the famous adult team ; the Justice League .
The third season will focus on the Team battling metahuman trafficking as , after the events of season two , where the Reach revealed the existence of the metagene , various nations and organizations have started participating in such activities ; it will also feature the superhero team Outsiders .
Young Justice originally aired on Cartoon Network for two seasons from 2010 to 2013 , before being cancelled due to low toy sales and Mattel pulling funding .
Following a strong fan campaign and high viewership ratings on Netflix , the series was officially renewed for a third season by Warner Bros. in November 2016 .
Development on Outsiders began the next month .
By July 2017 , it was announced that the third season would contain 26 episodes , and that at least half of them had been written .
The first episode is set to air starting January 4 , 2019 on DC 's new digital platform , DC Universe , for a total of 26 episodes .
CAST AND CHARACTERS
THE OUTSIDERS * Jesse McCartney as Dick Grayson
/ Nightwing
* Nolan North as Conner Kent / Superboy and Clark Kent / Superman * Stephanie Lemelin as Artemis
Crock / Tigress
* Jason Spisak as Forager * Zehra Fazal as Halo
* Troy Baker as Prince Brion Markov / Geo - Force
THE TEAM
* Khary Payton as Kaldur'ahm / Aqualad * Alyson Stoner as Barbara Gordon / Oracle * Eric Lopez as Jaime Reyes / Blue Beetle * Jason Marsden as Bart Allen / Kid Flash * Mae Whitman as Cassie Sandsmark / Wonder Girl
OTHERS
* Britt Baron * Vanessa Marshall as Dinah Laurel Lance / Black Canary * Marina Sirtis as Queen Bee
* Mark Rolston as Lex Luthor * Bill Fagerbakke as Big Bear * Kelly Hu as Jade Nguyen / Cheshire * Masasa Moyo as Cat Grant * Steve Blum as Count Vertigo * Fred Tatasciore as Slade Wilson / Deathstroke
PRODUCTION CANCELLATION AND REVIVAL Section::::Production .
Section::::Cancellation and revival .
In January 2013 , Cartoon Network had meetings with potential clients and promotional partners in which they announced their 2013–14 programming lineup with Young Justice being absent .
A Warner Bros. Animation representative confirmed in an interview with Newsarama the cancellation of both Young Justice and , with the DC Nation block replacing the series with Teen Titans Go !
and Beware the Batman .
While a fan - campaign was created in the hopes of financing continuations for both shows , Warner Bros. halted the campaign in May as they did not believe the goal could be reached .
In December 2013 , Kevin Smith and Paul Dini claimed in an episode of Smith 's podcast Fatman on Batman , that Young Justice was cancelled due to the program 's high female viewership , as network executives did not believe girls would buy toys based on the show .
Greg Weisman however denied this rumor and in a January 2016 episode of " The Hip - Hop Nerd " podcast , revealed the real reason why it was canceled .
The show 's funding was based on a toy deal with the toy company Mattel and due to low toy - sales , Mattel pulled the funding .
With no other source of income to replace the money Mattel provided , the series was effectively canceled .
The possibility of Young Justice revived first occurred in early February 2016 when the series ' second season was released on Netflix , with Weisman urging fans to watch all episodes " over and over " or buy the Blu - rays if they wished for a third season .
Weisman later clarified that while neither Warner Bros. or Netflix had expressed interest in picking up the show for a third season , high viewership on Netflix could motivate Warner Bros. into renewing the show .
During June , Weisman revealed that the possibility of Young Justice being renewed was " very real " but noted that fans needed to keep the show trending in order to convince Warner and Netflix of its potential .
On November 7 , 2016 , it was officially confirmed by Sam Register , president of Warner Bros. Animation and Warner Digital Series , that Young Justice was renewed for a third season , stating that the dedicated fanbase and " [ its ] rallying cry for more episodes " resonated with them .
It was also confirmed that Weisman and Brandon Vietti would be returning as showrunners .
DEVELOPMENT AND WRITING Section::::Development and writing .
Weisman revealed in December 2016 , that he and Vietti had already started working on the show 's third season , and that the series would pick up story elements from the first two seasons , as well as the tie - in comic series .
On February 27 , 2017 , Phil Bourassa — lead character designer of Young Justice — revealed that he had begun working on the third season .
A week later , he revealed that some scripts had already been completed .
On April 25 , it was announced that the show 's third season would be titled Young Justice : Outsiders and would debut on DC 's new digital service .
In late May , it was revealed that Chris Copeland joined the crew as a storyboard artist .
Outsiders had its own panel at San Diego Comic - Con International 2017 in July 21 .
During the panel , which was presented by Weisman , Vietti and Bourassa , they revealed that the first 12 scripts had already been finalized , ten were still being written and four more had not been started yet ; this brought the total number of episodes for Outsiders to 26 .
The team 's current roster was also revealed , consisting of : Static , Kid Flash , Robin , Wonder Girl , Spoiler , Blue Beetle , Beast Boy , and Arsenal as well as new characters Arrowette and Thirteen .
It was also revealed that Dick Grayson / Nightwing , Artemis Crock , and Superboy would all be returning .
Vandal Savage and the Light have been confirmed to return .
Regarding the all - black stealth suits worn by Nightwing , Artemis , Superboy , and Black Lightning , Bourassa stated that they are connected to Nightwing 's story arc from the second season .
The show jumps forward a few years .
Due to Young Justice : Outsiders airing on a streaming service rather than a television channel , it will " skew more adult to keep up with the characters as they age " .
When discussing the third season additions to " The Team " and its line - up , Weisman said that while the show would continue to focus on the characters introduced in the first season , they also wanted to introduce new characters as Young Justice is " a show about generations " .
According to Vietti , Outsiders will revisit ideas that he and Weisman had originally planned while making the first two seasons of the show .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
The first voice actor confirmed to return was Khary Payton as Aqualad in February 2017 .
It was later revealed in April that voice work on Outsiders had started .
In May , Alyson Stoner was later confirmed to return .
In June , Nolan North revealed that he had recorded five episodes .
In July , Marina Sirtis confirmed she would return to voice Queen Bee .
ANIMATION Section::::Animation .
As with the previous seasons , Weisman confirmed that studios in South Korea are working on the animations .
Digital eMation , another Korean studio which have n't worked on the series before , is also confirmed to be animating certain episodes .
RELEASE BROADCAST Section::::Release .
Section::::Broadcast .
Young Justice : Outsiders will premiere on January 4 , 2019 , on DC Universe , DC Comics ' new digital media service .
The first 13 episodes will air throughout January , with three episodes being released every Friday except January 25 , where four episodes will be released .
In November 2017 , it was announced that Outsiders would premiere " sometime after September " , during the fourth quarter of 2018 , but was pushed back to 2019 in June 2018 .
MARKETING Section::::Marketing .
A panel to promote Outsiders was held at San Diego Comic - Con International ( SDCC ) on July 21 , 2017 , and was attended by Greg Weisman , Brandon Vietti and Phil Bourassa .
At the panel , two pieces of artwork were released , showcasing the main members of the Team , which included three new characters .
Additionally , new designs for Nightwing , Artemis , Superboy , and Black Lightning were also shown .
Another panel was held at SDCC on July 20 , 2018 .
The panel was once again attended by Weisman , Vietti , and Bourassa , alongside voice actors Troy Baker , and Stephanie Lemelin .
During the panel , the first trailer was released , introducing numerous new characters .
On August 31 , 2018 , it was announced that a DLC level pack based on the series will be integrated for Lego DC Super - Villains .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Young Justice : Outsiders on Wikia 's Young Justice Wiki