GROWN - ISH Grown - ish ( stylized as · ) is an American sitcom series and a spin - off of the ABC series Black - ish .
The single - camera comedy follows the Johnsons ' eldest daughter Zoey ( Yara Shahidi ) as she heads off to college and begins her journey to adulthood but quickly discovers that not everything goes her way once she leaves the nest she always knew .
Deon Cole , Trevor Jackson , Francia Raisa , Emily Arlook , Jordan Buhat , Chloe x Halle , Luka Sabbat , and Chris Parnell also star .
Created by Black - ishs Kenya Barris , the series is produced by Khalabo Ink Society , Wilmore Films , Cinema Gypsy Productions and Principato - Young Entertainment , with Anthony Anderson , Brian Dobbins , and Helen Sugland acting as executive producers .
Freeform officially ordered 13 episodes of the spin - off in May 2017 , and it premiered on January 3 , 2018 .
On January 18 , 2018 , Freeform renewed the series for a second season of 20 episodes .
It is scheduled to premiere on January 2 , 2019 .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* Yara Shahidi as Zoey Johnson –
An attractive and stylish Cal U student .
She meets her core six friends in Professor Telphy 's class .
* Deon Cole as Professor Charlie Telphy – A night time adjunct professor at Cal U teaching a class called " Digital Marketing Strategies " , which is all about drones .
* Trevor Jackson as Aaron Jackson – Aaron is a sophomore at
Cal U. He is " woke " as evident by his many buttons to various causes .
* Francia Raisa as Analisa " Ana " Patricia Torres –
Ana is a freshman at
Cal U. She was born to Cuban immigrants , is a devout Catholic , and a Republican .
She is Zoey 's roommate .
* Emily Arlook as Nomi Segal – Nomi is Jewish American .
She is bisexual , but not out to her family .
* Jordan Buhat as Vivek Shah – Vivek is a first generation Gujarati Indian .
His parents are devout Hindus .
He is a drug dealer to support his fashion choices .
* Chloe Bailey as Jazlyn Forster – Jazlyn ( twin of Skylar ) is a track athlete at
Cal U. She is from South Los Angeles .
* Halle Bailey as Skylar Forster – Skylar ( twin of Jazlyn ) is a track athlete at
Cal U. She is from South Los Angeles .
Both girls are intensely smart , sassy , but focused on the bigger picture .
* Luka Sabbat as Luca Hall – Luca is a freshman at Cal U and is a stoner .
He is very independent and a trend setter , as seen in his outlandish fashion choices and his relaxed attitude toward life .
He also works alongside Zoey at Teen Vogue , an internship he got by chance .
* Chris Parnell as Dean Burt Parker – Burt is the dean of students .
He is also Nomi 's Uncle .
RECURRING
* Da'Vinchi as Cash Mooney -Zoey 's first college boyfriend and star of the school 's basketball team .
* Diggy Simmons as Doug – Jazlyn 's boyfriend NOTABLE
GUESTS
* Anthony Anderson as Andre " Dre " Johnson Sr . –
Zoey 's father .
* Tracee Ellis Ross as Dr. Rainbow " Bow " Johnson – Zoey 's mother .
PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT AND CASTING Section::::Production .
Section::::Development and casting .
" Liberal Arts " , the 23rd episode of season 3 of Black - ish , functioned as a backdoor pilot for this spin - off , featuring Yara Shahidi 's character , Zoey Johnson , as she goes to college .
Shahidi stars in the series , with Chris Parnell , Mallory Sparks , Matt Walsh , and Trevor Jackson guest starring in the backdoor pilot .
The series was later titled College - ish , with Parnell and Jackson reprising their roles from the backdoor pilot , and Emily Arlook replacing Mallory Sparks in the role of Miriam .
In August 2017 , Francia Raisa joined the cast as Ana along with Jordan Buhat as Vivek .
Music duo Chloe and Halle would also star as twin sisters Sky and Jazz .
On May 19 , 2017 , Freeform ( ABC 's sister network ) officially ordered 13 episodes of the spin - off under the final title , Grown - ish .
On January 18 , 2018 , Freeform renewed the series for a second season .
EPISODES
SEASON 1 ( 2018 )
SEASON 2
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes , the series has an approval rating of 93 % based on 30 reviews , with an average rating of 7.34/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " grown - ish quickly works through its growing pains to establish itself as its own socially aware show with a fresh perspective on the college experience , driven by the charming and capable Yara Shahidi .
" Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned a score of 71 out of 100 , based on 15 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
RATINGS ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Year ! !
Award ! !
Category ! !
Nominee ! !
Result ! !
Ref .
rowspan="6"2018 MTV Movie & TV Awards
Best Show Grown - ish align="center "
rowspan="2"Black Reel
Awards Outstanding Comedy Series Anthony Anderson , Kenya Barris , Julie Bean , E. Brian Dobbins , Laurence Fishburne , Helen Sugland , Jamie Pedrosa , Tom Ragazzo
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS