RED - LIGHT DISTRICTS IN BELGIUM Prostitution is legal in Belgium , but related activities such as organising prostitution and other forms of pimping are illegal .
Enforcement varies , and in some areas brothels are unofficially tolerated .
Most of the red - light districts ( RLDs ) in Belgium are made up of windows ( where the prostitutes sit , usually scantily dressed , trying to entice customers in ) although some street prostitution does occur .
RED - LIGHT DISTRICTS BY CITY BRUSSELS Section::::Red - light districts by city .
Section::::Brussels .
The main red light district in Brussels is north of the Gare du Nord .
In Rue d'Aerschot , Rue de Brabant and the surrounding side - streets there are sex shops and many windows where prostitutes sit .
Most of the prostitutes near the Gare du Nord , including Rue d'Aerschot , are Romanian and Bulgarian .
Further away from the station the girls are more from Ghana and Nigeria .
The Alhambra Quarter of Brussels ( South - west of the Gare du Nord ) has traditionally been an area where street prostitution has occurred .
There have been numerous attempts to ban street prostitution from the area .
In 2012 , new regulations were introduced to restrict the girls and also to punish kerb - crawlers .
A new city regulation in 2016 banned the prostitutes from the area and proposed a new tolerance zone nearer the Gare du Nord .
This was overturned by the Council of State at the end of 2016 .
A second , smaller area of street prostitution is along Avenue Louise , where street walkers ply their trade at night .
ANTWERP Section::::Antwerp .
In Antwerp prostitution is only permitted in the area bounded by Verversrui , Vingerlingstraat and Schippersstraat , locally knows as ' schipperskwartier ' ( shipper 's quarters ) .
Prostitution in the city was previously run by gangs and violence
was common .
In the year 2000 the city , led by the mayor , started a clean up operation .
The areas in which prostitution was allowed was reduced to the schipperskwartier , and a permit system was introduced .
The permits for owners of the windows have to be personally signed by the mayor .
This helps to keep organised crime out of the area .
The area was refurbished and pedestrianised in an attempt to get away from the previous seedy - looking image .
Usually windows in red light districts are isolated from one another , but the windows here are interconnected in groups of 3 , 5 or 7 so the prostitutes may socialise with each other and also aid each other in the event of trouble with a client .
There is a small police station within the area , but the police keep a low profile .
Between Verversrui and Schippersstraat is the Villa Tinto .
Previously an industrial building , it has been converted by architect Arne Quinze and Flemish interior designers into a complex with 51 windows on the ground floor with a doctor 's practice and bed & breakfast rooms above .
The project was set up by Franky De Coninck , a respected Belgian businessman .
It has been called " Europe 's most high tech bordello " .
Opened in 2005 , it opens seven days a week with about a 100 girls working there in shifts .
In an attempt to prevent human trafficking , only women with EU passports can work there and there are biometric keypads to the rooms so there can be no subletting .
Each room has a panic button in case of trouble .
CHARLEROI Section::::Charleroi .
Prostitution in Charleroi formally took place in various places over the city .
In 2002 the council limited the activity to a small area , known as the " Charleroi Triangle " ( intersection of rue du Moulin , rue de Marchienne , rue Arthur Pater , rue de la Fenderie and place Rucloux ) .
The city started planning to redevelop the " Lower City " , including the Triangle , and in 2011 the trade was forced to relocate to the area around the ministère des Finances ( rue des Rivages , rue Monnet , la place des Tramways and rue du Grand Central ) .
The new area was thought to be less secure than the triangle by the prostitutes and attempts were made to move back to the old area .
Street prostitution was prevalent in Gosselie on the northern outskirts of Charleroi .
In June 2011 this was limited to the area behind the TEC Charleroi buildings .
The prostitutes disregarded this limit , prompting a total ban on street prostitution in 2014 .
Also in Gosselie are some drinking establishments where prostitution is allowed .
These are on faubourg de Bruxelles and the N5 .
DEINZE Section::::Deinze .
In Deinze there are a few windows along the Kortrijksesteenweg ( N43 ) .
The road has been nicknamed " Rue d'amour " .
GHENT Section::::Ghent .
There are two red - light districts in Ghent , located close to each other .
The larger is in Schepenenvijverstraat and Pieter Vanderdoncktdoorgang including Glazen Straatje ( a glass roofed arcade ) .
There are just under 70 windows here .
The second area is situated in Belgradostraat , and has about 30 windows .
Following pressure from locals , the prostitutes in the windows in Ghent dress in a respectable fashion .
LIEGE
Section::::Liege .
Rue Varin , in the Liège - Cathédrale quarter had been a centre on prostitution since the 19th century .
The area was partially demolished in the early 2000 's for the rebuilding of Liège - Guillemins railway station .
The remaining building were renovated as part of the gentrification of the area and prostitution stopped .
There was a window area in Liege centred around Rue du Champion and Rue de l'Agneau near the River Meuse 's west bank .
This was shut in 2009 Street prostitution
has been a problem in this area and also around Grand Poste since the windows were closed .
Following the shutting of the windows , about 180 prostitutes moved to Seraing .
The council had planned to build an " Eros Centre " for the prostitutes to work in but this was cancelled .
OSTEND Section::::Ostend .
There have been windows in various streets in the docklands area of Ostend - Langestraat , Hazegras , Fregatstraat , Vrijhavenstraat and Oesterbankstraat .
Ostend council have been trying to clean the area up and many establishments have closed .
SERAING
Section::::Seraing .
There are a number of windows in rue Marnix , Seraing .
There were about 100 prostitutes working there until the shutting of the windows in Liege , when about 180 prostitutes moved to Seraing .
The council plan to stop prostitution in rue Marnix and build a new " Eros Centre " .
The centre will have 34 working rooms , a medical office , police station and a car park .
Activities within the centre will be screened from the passing public .
SINT - TRUIDEN Section::::Sint - Truiden .
There are a number of windows along Luikersteenweg , Sint - Truiden .
It is known locally as " Chaussée d'Amour " .
Currently there are 42 brothel permits issued , but the mayor of Sint - Truiden wants to tighten up on the establishments .
Weekly checks on working conditions and work permits are carried out by the local police .
FURTHER READING
SEE ALSO
* Prostitution in Belgium *
Red - light district
* List of red - light districts REFERENCES