NORTH KOREA
AT
THE 2018 WINTER OLYMPICS North Korea competed in the 2018 Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang , South Korea .
Two figure skaters , Ryom Tae - ok and Kim Ju - sik , qualified for the Games , but the Olympic Committee of the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea ( North Korea ) failed to enter them by the 30 October deadline .
On 9 January 2018 , North Korea agreed in negotiations with South Korea to send both athletes and a delegation to the Winter Olympics .
The teams representing North Korea and South Korea entered the Opening Ceremony marching under the Korean Unification Flag , while in women 's ice hockey there was a single united Korean team .
COMPETITORS Section::::Competitors .
The following is the list of number of competitors participating in the North Korean delegation per sport . !
width=160Sport ! !
width=60Men ! !
width=60Women ! !
width=60Total !
Total 7 3 10 LEAD UP TO THE GAMES Section::::Lead up to the Games .
The International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) wanted to have North Korean athletes at the Games .
In order to increase their chances of qualification , the IOC offered to support them with equipment , accommodation , and travel to qualification events .
North Korean short track speed skaters and cross - country skiers did not qualify for the Games .
A wild card arrangement was considered for the eventuality that no North Korean athlete would have qualified .
The host nation South Korea had proposed a unified team of the two Koreas at the Games .
The team would participate at least in the women 's ice hockey event and possibly more disciplines .
North Korea refused this in June 2017 on the grounds of time constraints .
Similarly , South Korea had suggested that North Korea could co - host some of the skiing events at the Masikryong Ski Resort .
This suggestion came after Moon Jae - in was elected President of South Korea in 2017 .
Earlier in December 2014 , the organizers had denied the possibility of sharing any part of their bid with the North .
Like the unified team proposal , the new co - hosting proposal was refused by the North .
North Korea , however , supported South Korea 's Olympic bid for the 2018 games .
This was unlike in 1988 , when North Korea was willing to co - host the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul , but once those plans failed , it ended up boycotting the Games and bombing Korean Air Flight 858 in what is believed to be an attempt to sabotage the Games .
QUALIFICATION Section::::Qualification .
Ryom Tae - ok and Kim Ju - sik
qualified for the Games on 29 September 2017 at the 2017 CS Nebelhorn Trophy in Oberstdorf , Germany .
Their successful free skating program was to the tune of " Je ne suis qu'une chanson " by Ginette Reno and their short program on the day before was to the music of The Beatles .
They took one of the five available qualification spots for pair skaters at the event , as they were expected beforehand .
The qualification was seen as a positive development , since it could alleviate fears of the escalation of the 2017–18 North Korea crisis that might have otherwise jeopardized the Games .
The International Skating Union confirmed Ryom and Kim 's qualification , but the Olympic Committee of the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea ( North Korea ) had to approve their participation , which Chang Ung , a North Korean member of the IOC , said he found likely .
" I am quite sure that politics is one thing and Olympics is another thing .
So I do n't see any big problem for the Pyeongchang Olympics " , he has said .
Despite this , the DPRK National Olympic Committee failed to accept the two athletes by the deadline of 30 October .
FAILURE TO ENTER
ATHLETES Section::::Failure to enter athletes .
Because the North Korean NOC failed to enter their only qualified athletes to the Games , its participation remained uncertain .
The North Korean spot went to the runners up , Sumire Suto and Francis Boudreau - Audet representing Japan .
They needed to accept the spot by 21 December , which did not happen .
North Korea could have still requested its quota to be confirmed , in which case the IOC would have deliberated on the matter . "
[ W]e would of course be flexible if they expressed a desire to come " , an IOC spokesperson has said .
A wild card option remained on the table .
Organizers of the games did not expect the final decision on participation to be made until the very last opportunity , and Moon Jae - in had given North Korea the chance to decide on participation at any time before the Games begin .
HIGH - LEVEL TALKS Section::::High - level talks .
The impasse ended when North Korea 's leader Kim Jong - un signaled a possibility to send athletes to the Games after all in his New Year 's speech for 2018 , saying " North Korea 's participation in the Winter Games will be a good opportunity to showcase the national pride and we wish the Games will be a success .
Officials from the two Koreas may urgently meet to discuss the possibility " .
The announcement was followed by South Korean agreement to participate in the first high - level talks with the North since December 2015 .
The talks were scheduled for 9 January 2018 .
North Korea is also prepared to talk to the IOC that week .
In preparation for the North – South talks , the two countries restored the Seoul – Pyongyang hotline , which had been inactive for almost two years , and exchanged related documents via fax .
After these developments , North Korea 's IOC member Chang Ung said that the participation of North Korean figure skaters again looked likely .
After discussions on 9 January 2018 , North Korea announced they would send athletes to compete along with a delegation to attend the Winter Olympics .
These moves were met with opposition in South Korea , including protests and online petitions ; critics argued that the government was attempting to use the Olympics to spread pro - North Korean sentiment , and that the unified hockey team would fail .
A rap video entitled " The Regret for Pyeongchang " ( 평창유감 ) , which echoed this criticism and called the event the " Pyongyang Olympics " , went viral in the country .
Japan 's foreign affairs minister Tarō Kōno warned South Korea to be wary of North Korea 's " charm offensive " , and not to ease its pressure on the country .
DIPLOMACY
AT
THE GAMES Section::::Diplomacy at the Games .
The athletes from North and South marched under the Korean unification flag in the opening ceremony .
South Korean Won Yun - jong and North Korean Hwang Chung - gum both held the flagpole .
As well as the athletes , North Korea sent an unprecedented high - level delegation , headed by Kim Yo - jong , sister of Kim Jong - un , and President Kim Yong - nam , and including performers like the Samjiyon Orchestra .
The delegation passed on an invitation to President Moon to visit North Korea .
The South Korean President , Moon Jae - in , at the start of the Olympics shook hands with Kim Yo - jong .
This marked the first time since the Korean War that a member of the ruling Kim dynasty had visited South Korea .
In contrast , US Vice President Mike Pence met North Korean defectors in PyeongChang joined by Fred Warmbier , whose son Otto died the year before after being released from North Korean captivity .
American officials said that North Korea cancelled a meeting with Pence at the last minute .
The apparent softening of relations between the two countries was marred by North Korea dispatching general Kim Yong - chol to head the North Korean delegation present at the closing ceremony .
The arrival of Kim , held responsible by South Korea for the deaths of dozens of South Korean navy personnel , was met with hostility but the government did not oppose his presence at the Olympics .
The general ended up being seated in the same stand as the daughter of the president of the USA , Ivanka Trump .
ALPINE SKIING
Choe Myong - gwang align =
leftMen 's giant slalom
1:38.67 85
1:33.34 75 3:12.01 75 align = center
align =
leftMen 's slalom
1:09.42 51
1:13.39 43 2:22.81 43 align = center align = left rowspan=2Kang Song - il align =
leftMen 's giant slalom
1:32.03 84
1:29.99 74 3:02.02 74
align = center align =
leftMen 's slalom
1:11.43 52 colspan=4 align = center align =
left rowspan=2Kim Ryon - hyang align =
leftWomen 's giant slalom colspan=2 colspan=2 align = center
align
= leftWomen 's slalom CROSS - COUNTRY SKIING Distance Han Chun - gyong align = left rowspan=2Men 's
15 km freestyle align = center align =
leftPak Il - chol align = center align =
leftRi Yong - gum align =
leftWomen 's 10 km freestyle FIGURE SKATING Section::::Figure skating . !
rowspan="2 "
Athlete !
rowspan="2 "
Event ! colspan="2
" ! colspan="2 " ! colspan="2 "
Total ! rowspan="2 " !
Points !
Rank !
Points !
Rank !
Points !
Rank align =
leftRyom Tae - okKim Ju - sik align
=
leftPairs ICE HOCKEY –
WOMEN 'S TOURNAMENT Section::::Ice hockey –
Women 's tournament .
In January 2018 , it was announced that the North Korean team would be amalgamated with a group of South Korean players to form a single Korean team in the tournament .
In this team , at least three North Korean players will be selected for each game .
South Korea women 's national ice hockey team qualified as the host .
SHORT TRACK SPEED SKATING Jong Kwang - bom
align =
leftMen 's 500 m
colspan=2 colspan=6 Did not advance align = center align
=
leftChoe Un - song align
=
leftMen 's 1500 m 2:18.213 6
colspan=2
colspan=4
Did not advance SEE
ALSO
* Concerns and controversies at the 2018 Winter Olympics
* Politics and sports * Korean conflict * North Korea at the 2017 Asian Winter Games * North Korea – South Korea relations
* North Korea women 's national ice hockey team * South Korea at the 2018 Winter Olympics * Korea at the 2018 Winter Olympics NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * North Korea at the 2018 Winter Olympics