JAMES AND THE GIANT PEACH ( MUSICAL ) James and the Giant Peach is a musical with music and lyrics by Benj Pasek and Justin Paul and book by Timothy Allen McDonald based on Roald Dahl 's children 's book of the same name .
After McDonald and Leslie Bricusse successfully developed Charlie and the Chocolate Factory into a musical , using songs from the 1971 film adaptation , Dahl 's widow Liccy granted the rights to develop James and the Giant Peach to McDonald .
McDonald started assembling the creative team in 2005 .
Lynn Ahrens , Freddie Gershon and Michael Kerker recommended the songwriting team of Benj Pasek and Justin Paul in 2008 .
After an audition where Pasek and Paul wrote three potential songs in a week , including two that would be worked into the show ( James 's first solo , " On Your Way Home " and " Property of Spiker and Sponge " ) , McDonald hired the duo .
The show was first staged at Goodspeed Musicals directed by Graciela Danielle featuring an all star cast .
This production was in talks to go to Broadway following the run .
However , due to mixed critical response , it was further developed by the team .
It has been re - worked since then and in 2015 , the new version became available for licensing through McDonald 's company Music Theatre International and is a popular show in youth and regional theatre .
A cast recording of this new version was released in 2015 .
Two other versions ( a Theatre For Young Audiences version and a Junior version ) are also available and are utilized commonly by children 's theatres .
SYNOPSIS ACT ONE
Section::::Synopsis .
Section::::Act One .
Ladahlord sets the stage by introducing the characters and setting the stage right in front of the audience ( " Right Before Your Eyes " ) .
The story starts with James having a nightmare while sleeping at the orphanage , remembering his parents getting eaten by a rhino at the London zoo .
He wakes up in a cold sweat .
He then explains to a ladybug and grasshopper on the ground his life problems ( " On Your Way Home " ) .
The next morning , James is informed that he is leaving the orphanage to live with his two aunts in Dover .
The audience meets Spiker and Sponge who are told they have to take care of a child .
They pick James up at the train station and decide to use him as a slave ( " Property of Spiker and Sponge " ) .
They take James back to their house .
Spiker walks into a spider - web and instructs James to cut down the old tree it was hanging from .
The two aunts leave for the beach .
Before James can cut down the tree , he pauses to save an earthworm from a centipede .
He then raises his ax but is stopped by a mysterious man named Ladahlord .
Ladahlord assists James in fixing his life by giving James access to one spell in Ladahlord 's book of spells ( " Shake it Up " ) .
The potion is made , and on James ' way back to Spiker and Sponge 's house , he trips , spilling the potion all over the old tree .
The next morning , Spiker and Sponge take James back out to the garden to do more work .
The three of them are surprised as they see a gigantic peach has grown on the tree .
Spiker realizes that she and Sponge can use the peach to make money , and make deals with companies , allowing the peach to be used for lots of commercial use and media ( " There 's Money on That Tree " ) .
James tells the aunts that he made the peach grow .
They call him a liar and force him to sleep outside .
James decides that he 'd rather live on his own than with Spiker and Sponge ( " Middle of a Moment " ) .
James enters the peach and meets the five insects he saw earlier : The grasshopper , ladybug , earthworm , spider , and centipede , who were also grown by Ladahlord 's spell .
The insects have also been harmed by the aunts and want to escape too .
Centipede cuts the stem of the peach and the peach rolls into the ocean and starts floating in the direction of France .
Grasshopper assures everyone that they will be safe and they can rely on the current to get them to France
( " Floatin ' Along " ) .
ACT TWO Section::::Act
Two .
Time has passed and all six of our characters are hungry .
They decide to ration out the peach so they wo n't starve and wo n't sink .
With new energy , the insects decide to entertain James with some personal facts ( " Have You Even Begun to Wonder ? " ) .
Back at the aunts ' house , the aunts realize they are going to get in trouble for not being able to keep all the promises they made because they lost the peach .
They are chased away by an angry mob ( " A Getaway For Spiker and Sponge " ) .
Back on the Peach , James has another nightmare .
He wakes up and the insects tell him about the troubles they had with the aunts .
Centipede reveals he hates all humans , including James .
The other four insects try to comfort James by telling him his parents ' memory will always be with him ( " Everywhere That You Are " ) .
Spiker and Sponge have escaped Dover and are now riding a cruise ship to who knows where .
They long over the money they could have had , but remember they still have each other ( " I Got You " ) .
They then spot the peach and redirect the cruise ship to follow it .
The peach gets attacked by sharks .
Worried that it will sink , James devises a plan to use Spider 's web to attach seagulls to the peach and fly out of the water .
They use Earthworm as bait to attract the seagulls ( " Plump and Juicy " ) .
Centipede is frusturated that the rest of the insects are accepting of James- a human .
He falls off the peach .
James ties himself to Spider 's web and jumps off to save Centipede .
Centipede realizes that maybe not all humans are so bad , but does n't know how to apologize .
They arrive in New York City and are attacked by Spiker and Sponge [ who have heat seeking missiles and attack helicopters for some reason ] , and the peach lands on the top of the Empire State building ( " Empire State / The Attack " ) .
Once the insects and James climb down the building and are on the ground , the aunts try to take James back and exterminate the insects but are squished by the peach falling off the top of the empire state building .
Centipede apologizes for his actions and decides to leave , but the other insects and James want him to stay ( " On Your Way Home [ Reprise ] " ) .
The show ends with all the insects becoming a family and living inside the peach pit in New York ( " Welcome Home " ) .
CHARACTERS AND ORIGINAL CASTS Section::::Characters and original casts . !
Character !
Broadway Tryout ( 2010 ) !
Seattle ( 2013 ) !
Toronto ( 2014 ) !
Cast Album ( 2015 ) !
Columbus Childrens ' Theatre ( 2017 ) !
Atlantic Theatre Company ( 2018 ) !
James Trotter !
Aunt Spiker !
Aunt Sponge !
Ladahlord * !
Grasshopper !
Ladybug !
Spider !
Earthworm !
Centipede
*
In the Connecticut Pre - Broadway production , the role of " Ladahlord " existed as " Marvo The Magician " .
Both characters served as partial narrators .
MUSICAL NUMBERS Section::::Musical numbers .
The following is the song list from the version currently available for licensing through Music Theatre International : Act I
*
" Right Before Your Eyes " - Company *
" On Your Way Home " - James * " Property of Spiker and Sponge " - Spiker and Sponge *
" Shake It Up " - Ladahlord and Company *
" There 's Money On That Tree " - Spiker , Sponge , and Company
* " Middle of a Moment " - James
* " Floatin ' Along " - Insects and James
Act II
* " Have You Even Begun to Wonder ? "
- Insects and James *
" A Getaway for Spiker and Sponge " - Spiker and Sponge *
" Everywhere That You Are " - Ladybug , Grasshopper , Earthworm , and Spider *
" I Got You " - Spiker , Sponge , and Company * " Plump and Juicy " Insects , James , and Company * " Empire State /
The Attack " Ladahlord and Company *
" On Your Way Home ( reprise ) " - James * " Welcome Home " - Company The Goodspeed Broadway tryout production opened with the song " Perfectly Perfect " during which James 's life with his parents and their subsequent death is shown and was followed by " Shuffle On Through " in which James experiences being put through the system as a orphan .
Beyond the other songs changing significantly in content and order , the other most notable difference is that " Right Before Your Eyes " had not yet been implemented .
PRODUCTIONS 2010 BROADWAY TRYOUT ( GOODSPEED ) Section::::Productions . Section::::2010
Broadway Tryout ( Goodspeed ) .
The musical premiered from 21 October 2010 to 21 November 2010 at Goodspeed Musicals in East Haddam , Connecticut .
The musical itself was quite different from its source material , but honored it .
Throughout the two - month run , the show was revised .
The cast featured young actors Ellis Gage and Justin Lawrence Hall playing James , Steve Rosen as Marvo The Magician , Ruth Gotschall as Aunt Spiker and Denny Dillon as Aunt Sponge .
The show also featured Jim Stanek as the Grasshopper , Chelsea Packard ( credited as Chelsea Krombach ) as the Ladybug , Kate Wetherhead as the Spider , Destan Owens as the Earthworm , Nick Gaswirth as the Centipede , also with Nicholas Park , Minami Yusi , Marissa Palley , and Jessica Fontana ( credited as Jessica Hershberg ) in the Ensemble .
The dance troupe " Pilobolus " were a large part of the production bringing an innovative theatrical technique of using their bodies to create most of the set , specifically using shadow technique to create a majority of the special effects .
The production featured musical direction by Chris Fenwick and Dance arrangements by Sam Davis .
The production was initially expected to go to Broadway but received mixed critical feedback and more room for development was seen .
Pasek and Paul stated during the Goodspeed staging " we decided from the beginning that we were not writing a show for children [ ... ]
we are taking some of Dahl 's darkness and expanding it even more . "
2012 KENNEDY CENTER Section::::2012 Kennedy Center .
A work - in - progress version of the musical played at the 2012 New Visions / New Voices festival , held at the Kennedy Center in May 2012 for plays in development written for young audiences .
The 2012 Kennedy Center production was directed by Marty Johnson and Timothy Allen McDonald . 2013
SEATTLE
Section::::2013 Seattle .
In November 2013 , a reworked version of the musical was presented at the Seattle Children 's Theatre .
After the 2010 production , the show underwent much revision , altering plot aspects and songs to appeal to a younger audience , the most notable of which were the omitting of its former title song , " Perfectly Perfect " , and the discontinuation of the use of " Pilobolus " .
Also , the character of Marvo , who , at times , was the narrator , is gone , and the introduction of " sophisticated " and " innovative " puppetry to depict some events , " including the show 's title character , the Giant Peach .
" The set was also more elaborate than at Goodspeed .
Justin Paul said of the revised version : " It 's certainly changed — and hopefully evolved — since we [ premiered ] the show at Goodspeed .
Obviously , that was the first time we 'd ever seen the show in front of an audience , so we learned a lot just from that … Now , we sort of put [ a different ] lens on it and said , ' It needs to be a show that is going to be engaging a young audience — targeted for all ages , ' [ ... ]
" Mike Spee , an adult , played James , Kendra Kassebaum played the Ladybug , and Julie Briskman and Jayne Muirhead played Sponge and Spiker , respectively . 2014
TORONTO
Section::::2014 Toronto .
In 2014 , the musical made its Canadian premiere at the Young People 's Theatre in Toronto , Ontario .
Directed by Sue Miner , choreographed by Jen Shuber and musically directed by Jason Jestadt , it featured Alessandro Constantini as James , Lana Carillo as Ladybug , Saccha Dennis as Spider , Stewart Adam McKensy as Grasshopper , Jacob MacInnis as Earthworm , Dale Miller as Centipede , Nicole Robert as Spiker and Karen Wood as Sponge .
The show was adapted into James and The Giant Peach Jr. , meant for actors ages 8 - 18 .
Its premiere was 14 October 2016 , at the Kum & Go Theater in Des Moines , Iowa .
CAST RECORDING
Section::::Cast Recording .
When the new Seattle version of the show was made available for licensing by McDonald 's company , Music Theatre International , a cast album was recorded and released in 2015 as a permanently free download along .
With young actor Luca Padovan as James , this cast featured Marc Kudisch as Ladahord , Jackie Hoffman and Mary Testa as Spiker and Sponge , respectively , Christian Borle as the Grasshopper , Megan Hilty as the Ladybug , Sarah Stiles as the Spider , Daniel Breaker as the Earthworm , and Brian d'Arcy James as the Centipede .
This included bonus tracks of Megan Hilty 's solo arrangement of " Everywhere That You Are " and Skylar Astin performing " Middle Of A Moment " .
OTHER VERSIONS Section::::Other Versions .
When Music Theatre International started to license the new version of the show in 2015 , they put two other versions on the market ; the Theatre For Young Audiences ( TYA ) version and a Junior version .
THEATRE FOR YOUNG AUDIENCES
Section::::Theatre For Young Audiences .
This version is like the full show but trimmed down to one act , most notably cutting " Middle Of A Moment " and " Have You Even Begun To Wonder ? " .
JUNIOR VERSION Section::::Junior Version .
Like the TYA version , this is one act , omitting " Middle Of A Moment " and " Have You Even Begin To Wonder ? " .
This , however , adds characters and features much larger cast and larger ensemble .
It is rated G unlike the full and TYA versions which are rated PG .
REFERENCES