A PLACE TO CALL HOME ( SEASON 5 )
The fifth season of the Seven Network television series A Place to Call Home premiered on Showcase on 8 October 2017 .
The series was produced by Chris Martin - Jones , and executive produced by Penny Win and Julie McGauran .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On 16 November 2016 , Foxtel announced that A Place to Call Home had been renewed for a fifth season .
Of the renewal , Foxtel CEO , Peter Tonagh stated " [ The show ] goes way beyond just being a piece of content that appears on the screen .
It 's a passion for hundreds of thousands of people who watch it every week . "
Production on the fifth season began in February 2017 .
Of the show 's return , Foxtel 's Head of Drama , Penny Win stated , " A Place to Call Home has continued to build very strong audiences and passionate fans throughout its time on Foxtel .
We are thrilled with the success of the series both here and around the world , and series five promises to be more of what our audience loves .
The incredible cast , whose performances are exemplary , and the creative team , led by Julie McGauran and Chris Martin - Jones , have brought Foxtel a wonderful piece of dramatic television that we are all very proud of .
"
Seven 's Head of Drama , Julie McGauran stated , " All of us at Seven Productions are delighted to continue the hugely successful collaboration with Foxtel on A Place To Call Home .
This series is testament to how great storytelling , the talents of a truly gifted cast and a superb production can align to create extraordinary television and Seven are proud to be a part of an industry here in Australia that continues to deliver world class drama . "
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Season five will time jump to 1958 , where four years have passed since we left Sarah and the Bligh family .
Those four years have seen ever increasing changes in Australian society .
The world of wealth and privilege is being eroded , moral values are fraying and a new young generation is rising , full of disaffection with the world of their elders .
To them the War is a matter of the dead past , bringing conflict with those who suffered its pain and deprivation .
Economic change and the devious actions of unseen enemies threaten Ash Park .
While friends become bitter rivals and former enemies become unlikely allies .
And in the midst of the turmoil , love becomes the only sure place anyone can call home .
CAST MAIN * Marta Dusseldorp as Sarah Nordmann
* Noni Hazelhurst as Elizabeth Goddard
* Brett Climo as George Bligh * Craig Hall as Dr. Jack Duncan * David Berry as James Bligh * Abby Earl as Anna Bligh * Arianwen Parkes - Lockwood as Olivia Bligh * Sara Wiseman as Carolyn Duncan * Jenni Baird as Regina Bligh
* Tim Draxl as Dr. Henry Fox
* Deborah Kennedy as Doris Collins
* Frankie J. Holden as Roy Briggs RECURRING & GUEST
* Elliot Domoney as David Bligh * Martin Sacks as Isaac Gold * Madeleine Clunies - Ross as Leah Gold * Heather Mitchell as Prudence Swanson
* Mark Lee as Sir Richard Bennett
* Robert Coleby as Douglas Goddard * Conrad Coleby as Matthew Goddard * Clodagh Crowe as Dawn Briggs
* George Pullar as Larry Forbes * Aaron Pedersen as Frank Gibbs * Matt Day as Ed Jarvis Notes EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
RATINGS
Section::::Ratings . !
No . !
Title !
Air date !
Viewers !
Rank REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS