X - RING CHAIN
The X - ring chain is a specialized type of sealed roller chain used to transfer mechanical power .
Like the O - ring chain it is used in high performance motorcycles .
It uses X - ring seal to keep lubricant(usually grease ) in place .
It has higher performance ( in terms of durability , lifetime , and power loss ) than non - O - ring chain as it has less friction than O - ring chain which also increases reliability .
It can last twice as long as the O - ring chain .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
The X - ring chain is developed from O - ring chain which in turn is developed from non O - ring chain .
While the regular O - ring chain has high durability , it also has more friction(compared to other types of roller chain )
due to distortion of the O - ring due to pressure from the inner and outer chain plates .
This results in loss of power in the transmission .
Therefore , X - ring chain was developed by replacing O - ring seal with X - ring seal which increased durability and greatly reduced friction .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
Like the O - ring chain it has sealing rings which keep the contaminant ( dirt ) out , and lubricant in between the pins and bushings .
This is known as internal lubrication .
However , unlike O - ring chain , it has X shaped seal which does not increase surface area ( which is in contact with the chain plates ) when under pressure .
Therefore the friction in X - ring chain does not increase much when pressure is applied by the chain plates .
+ Comparison between Standard roller chain , X - ring , and O - ring chain . !
Chain type !
Standard roller !
O - ring chain !
X - ring chain
Lubrication Externally lubricated Self lubricating(Internal )
Self lubricating(Internal )
Durability
Low
High
Very High Efficiency High
Relatively low
Very High Maintenance
Frequent Less frequent , special care
Least frequent , special care Stretching Regular Limited Limited Cost Relatively cheaper Relatively Expensive Relatively expensive SEE ALSO
* Motorcycle transmission
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Cleaning a Motorcycle Chain - webBikeWorld