METALLURGICAL COAL
Metallurgical coal is a grade of low - ash , low - sulfur and low - phosphorus coal that can be used to produce high grade coke .
Coke is an essential fuel and reactant in the blast furnace process for primary steelmaking .
The demand for metallurgical coal is highly coupled to the demand for steel .
Primary steelmaking companies will often have a division that produces coal for coking , to ensure stable and low - cost supply .
Metallurgical coal is distinguished by the strong low - density coke produced when the coal is heated in a low - oxygen environment to reduce mineral impurities ( e.g. less sulfur , phosphorus ) .
On heating , the coal softens , and volatile components evaporate and escape through pores in the mass .
On cooling , the resultant coke has swollen , becoming a larger volume .
The coking ability of coal is somewhat correlated with its physical properties such as its rank , but laboratory testing is required to completely evaluate the coking ability of the coal .
The strength and density of coke is particularly important when it is used in a blast furnace , as the coke supports part of the ore and flux burden inside the furnace .
Coking coal is usually Bituminous coal .
Some grades of Anthracite coal are used for sintering , PCI , direct BF charge , pelletizing , and in production of ferro - alloys , silicon - manganese , calcium - carbide and silicon - carbide .
Metallurgical coal contrasts with thermal coal , and has different sources ( produced mainly in Canada , the United States , and Australia ) and industrial significance ; prices for the two may vary .
CAKING ABILITY
Section::::Caking ability .
The suitability for conversion to coke is also referred to as the caking ability .
Metallurgical coal is harder , blacker , produces less ash when burned , and contains less moisture .
TYPES Section::::Types .
There are several types of metallurgical coal : * Hard coking coals ( HCC )
* Medium coking coal
* Semi - soft coking coal ( SSCC ) * Pulverized coal injection ( PCI )
coal
SEE
ALSO
* Coking coal
* Metallurgy * Coal assay * Anthracite * Lignite REFERENCES