SACRED GAMES ( TV SERIES )
Sacred Games is an Indian web television thriller series based on Vikram Chandra 's 2006 novel of the same name .
The first Netflix original series in India , it is directed by Vikramaditya Motwane and Anurag Kashyap , who produced it under their banner Phantom Films .
The novel was adapted by Varun Grover , Smita Singh and Vasant Nath .
Kelly Luegenbiehl , Erik Barmack and Motwane served as the executive producers .
Sartaj Singh ( Saif Ali Khan ) is a troubled police officer in Mumbai who receives a phone call from gangster Ganesh Gaitonde ( Nawazuddin Siddiqui ) , who tells him to save the city within 25 days .
The series chronicles the events that follow .
Other cast members include Radhika Apte , Girish Kulkarni , Neeraj Kabi , Jeetendra Joshi , Rajshri Deshpande , Karan Wahi , Aamir Bashir , Jatin Sarna , Elnaaz Norouzi and Kubra Sait .
The development of Sacred Games started after Erik Barmack , the Vice - president of Netflix contacted Motwane to create Indian content for the platform in 2014 .
They opted to adapt Chandra 's novel in the local Indian language , to which Motwane agreed .
After the script was completed , Motwane asked Kashyap to co - direct ; Motwane directed the sequences involving Singh while Kashyap directed Gaitonde 's .
Swapnil Sonawane was the director of photography for Motwane ; Sylvester Fonseca and Aseem Bajaj filmed the scenes directed by Kashyap .
Aarti Bajaj was the editor and Alokananda Dasgupta composed the background score .
The first four episodes of Sacred Games premiered on 29 June 2018 , with the full season of eight episodes released on Netflix on 6 July across 191 countries ; it had subtitles in more than 20 languages .
It received mostly positive reviews from critics , with particular praise for the performances and writing .
In September 2018 , it was announced that the series has been renewed for a second season .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
Sartaj Singh is a troubled police inspector in Mumbai police , living on sleeping pills and seeking validation from a police force he nevertheless loathes for its corruption .
He receives an anonymous phone call from Ganesh Gaitonde , a notorious crime lord who has been missing for 16 years .
He tells Singh to save the city in 25 days , which initiates a chain of events that burrows deep into India 's dark underworld .
In the journey , Singh is helped by a Research and Analysis Wing officer , Anjali Mathur .
CAST MAIN * Saif Ali Khan as Inspector Sartaj Singh * Nawazuddin Siddiqui as Ganesh Gaitonde * Radhika Apte as Anjali Mathur ( season 1 )
RECURRING * Neeraj Kabi as DCP Parulkar * Jatin Sarna as Deepak
" Bunty " Shinde * Kubra Sait as Kukoo * Jitendra Joshi as Constable Katekar
* Rajshri Deshpande as Subhadra
* Luke Kenny as Malcolm Mourad * Elnaaz Norouzi as Zoya Mirza / Jamila * Pankaj Tripathi as Khanna Guru Ji * Aamir Bashir as Inspector Majid Ali Khan
* Geetanjali Thapa as Nayanika Sehgal * Shalini Vatsa as Kanta Bai * Surveen Chawla as Jojo Mascarenas * Girish Kulkarni as Bipin Bhosale * Anupriya Goenka as Megha Singh * Danish Pandor as Bada Badariya * Anil Charanjeet as Chota Badariya * Vikram Kochar as Mathu * Samir Kochhar as SPI Markand * Chittaranjan Tripathy as Trivedi * Rajendra Shisatkar as ASI Dhobale * Sukhmani Sadana as Mikki * Muni Jha as Paritosh Shah * Karan Wahi as
Karan Malhotra * Promita Banik as Bunty 's Girlfriend
* Nawab Shah as Salim Kaka * Jaipreet Singh as Constable Dilbagh Singh * Raj Kashyap as Junaid Sheikh * Affan Khan as Young Sartaj Singh * Sunny Pawar as Young Ganesh Gaitonde * Saurabh Sachdeva as Suleiman Isa
* Sandesh Kulkarni as Gaitonde 's Father * Vibhavari Deshpande as Gaitonde 's Mother * Neha Shitole as Constable Katekar 's wife EPISODES PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Erik Barmack , the vice president of Netflix , came across Vikram Chandra 's 2006 crime novel , Sacred Games , while they were searching for content for Indian and the global audience .
He called it " an interesting property " and decided to adapt it in Indian language .
They decided to approach Phantom Films while looking for director and producer for the series .
In 2014 , writer - director Vikramaditya Motwane met the team of Netflix during his visit to Los Angeles .
Motwane had read Chandra 's earlier novel Love and Longing in Bombay where the character of Sartaj Singh was introduced .
After the meeting , he read Sacred Games and thought it was " great " .
He said the best thing for him was that they wanted to make it in Hindi and not in English , as according to him " speaking in English can seem so fake at times . "
He started working on the adaptation of the novel with writer Varun Grover and described the writing as the " biggest challenge " .
Motwane said that the digital series medium was " liberating " as he was able to tell stories that " do n't have to be told in two - and - a - half hours with an interval and three songs inserted into it . "
Initially , Motwane considered bringing different directors on board for each episode : " As we got closer to production , we realised that dates were clashing and that it was an overall nightmare [ .. ] . "
He suggested that Anurag Kashyap co - direct the series with him , as Motwane felt that the two " distinct voices " were essential for the " parallel tracks " of story .
Kashyap said he " gobbled " on the opportunity as he was fascinated with the novel .
Kashyap had read the novel in 2006 when it came out .
In 2014 , he had been approached by AMC from Scott Free Productions to direct a series in English .
Kashyap had declined the offer , as he did not want to do " anything based in India in English " .
Motwane and his writers gave the scripts to Chandra for feedback .
"
Chandra is so research - intensive that we did n't have to approach another researcher , we just had to ask him questions .
" The series was written by Grover , Smita Singh , and Vasant Nath .
One of the writers , Smita Singh , said that in 2016 , they were told by Phantom Films to adapt the novel and " it had to be a gripping , slow - burner " .
The research was headed by Smita Nair and Mantra Watsa , who summarised every chapter and made the " complex plot easily accessible " to the writers .
The entire script was completed in a year .
Nath said that in the beginning of the writing process , they were " chucking away some important characters from the original , and bringing in new ones " .
It is the first Indian original series for Netflix .
The episode titles are inspired by Hindu mythology .
The first episode titled " Aswatthama " , was based on the namesake character from the Sanskrit epic Mahabharata .
He was cursed with immortality by Krishna after the Kurukshetra war .
In the series , Gaitonde calls himself immortal like Ashwatthama , but later commits suicide .
" Halahala " , another episode , was named after a poison of the same name , which was retrieved from Samudra manthan .
Aatapi and Vatapi were two demons who used to trick travellers with hospitality and kill them .
Brahmahatya means killing of a Brahmin , which is a crime in Hinduism .
In the episode , the Hindu Gaitonde agrees to try to attract Muslim votes for Hindu politician Bhosale .
Sarama is referred to as a dog .
Pretakalpa learns the rites of a Hindu to perform the cremations .
In this episode , Katekar is killed and Sartaj cremates him .
Rudra is the angered version of Shiva .
Gaitonde 's wife Subhadra is killed in this episode ; he takes revenge by murdering her killers .
Yayati was king cursed with premature old age .
The title sequence , logo , and title designs were designed by graphic designer Aniruddh Mehta and Mumbai - based motion lab Plexus , who drew inspiration from the Hindu mythology for the designs .
Mehta said that each emblem was a contemporary take on " stories from ancient Hindu scriptures , mandala 's , mixing modern design elements with characters from the Indus Valley Civilization " that were derived from the episode titles .
Several changes were made while the team adapted the novel as a series .
The character of Kuckoo , a transgender woman , is mentioned in passing , as a dancer whom a police officer fell in love with .
A constable narrates this to Sartaj , describing Kuckoo as " beautiful as a Kashmiri apple " .
In the series , Kuckoo is an extended character and is shown as the love interest of Gaitonde .
Similarly , the character of Malcolm Murad , who is mentioned once in the novel , has an extended role as an assassin .
Few other changes were made .
In the novel , the riots were a part of the story , whereas in the series , they are narrated by Gaitonde in glimpses .
CASTING AND CHARACTERS Section::::Casting and characters .
Several characters in the series speak different Indian languages like Hindi , Marathi , Punjabi and Gujarati .
Kashyap mentioned that it gives a " real sense of what India is " .
Saif Ali Khan called the series an experiment and said he agreed to do it because " people are willing to watch programmes from other countries with sub - titles because good stories transcend boundaries .
"
Khan found an " interesting arc " in the character of Sartaj Singh and called it " troubled and honest " .
He said that he read bits of the novel but later dropped after he found it was not helping him find what needed as an actor .
Radhika Apte played the role of Research and Analysis Wing ( RAW ) officer Anjali Mathur .
Apte called her character a " completely no - nonsense , focused woman who 's highly respected in her field and by her peers . "
She mentioned that her character is not glamourised unlike the Hindi film 's depict a RAW agent and did not read the novel .
Kashyap said that the novel is about " how Bombay became Mumbai " and the series gives " a sense of the city , where it came from and where it is today . "
Nawazuddin Siddiqui said that he treated the role of a gangster as a human being .
He also felt that a series gives more time for the character to be explored , unlike a film ; he said he agreed to do the series as he wanted to explore the format .
He called it the most complex character he has played so far .
Khan read the short story Kama , written by Chandra , to " delve into his character 's angst . "
The character of Sartaj Singh was changed from the novel who is described as a thin and tall police officer to a muscled heavyweight .
Khan said that changes were made to make the character look " visually engaging " who is a " slightly more charged - up version of the passive officer in the books " .
Kashyap called Gaitonde the " sum of all we like in movie characters . "
Motwane said that Siddiqui was his first choice to portray Gaitonde because he " plays gangster so well " and " has that aura and almost everything that 's required to play a gangster . "
He expressed that casting popular actors like Khan and Siddiqui was a conscious decision as it also " drives a larger audience to watch .
He said that it was easier to convince Apte and Neeraj Kabi for the roles after Khan and Siddiqui were cast .
Kabi was cast in the role of DCP Parulkar , for which he researched from the novel .
He also worked on his body language as it was mentioned in the novel for the character .
Jitendra Joshi played the role of constable Katekar , who is Sartaj 's colleague .
He was selected for the role after giving an audition .
Joshi took inspiration from real life police officers for the character .
Actress Kubbra Sait played the role of Kuckoo , a transgender woman .
She was asked to audition by Kashyap at the screening of Mukkabaaz at MAMI Film Festival ; Sait auditioned and was eventually selected .
She said the lack of references for the role made it " the most challenging experience " of her career .
She wore a penis made of prosthetic makeup between her thighs .
Jatin Sarna played the role of gangster Deepak " Bunty " Shinde , which he got after auditioning .
Rajshri Deshpande played the role of Siddiqui 's wife , Subhadra .
Girish Kulkarni was originally offered the role of constable Katekar , which he declined as he wanted a character " that would figure in both Sartaj and Ganesh Gaitonde 's world " .
He then got the role of minister Bipin Bhosale .
Iranian actress Elnaaz Norouzi was cast in the role of film star Zoya Mirza .
The series ' production design was handled by Shazia Iqbal and Vintee Bansal ; Aarti Bajaj served as the editor of the series .
Swapnil Sonawane shot the portions directed by Motwane .
Sylvester Fonseca and Aseem Bajaj shot the scenes of Kashyap .
Anish John served as the sound designer .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Motwane started filming in September 2017 .
Kashyap started filming the series after the completion of Mukkabaaz and finished shooting in January 2018 .
Both Motwane and Kashyap shot the series separately ; Motwane directed the present - day scenes with Khan and Kashyap filmed the Bombay of the 1980s with Siddiqui .
Motwane called the exercise of shooting individually an " experiment " .
Kashyap said it was " painfully difficult " to find the " pockets of Bombay which has kept itself like it is " .
Chandra was working on the novel at the same time Kashyap was working on his film Black Friday ( 2007 ) , so he " knew the real - life parallels " in the novel .
Kashyap said that he shot and treated the series like a film .
Motwane said that apart from leaving out small details , they have " stuck to the spirit of the book " .
Motwane said that he tried to balance the series between " making it for a worldwide audience [ and not alienating ] everybody over here . "
Motwane said that he felt liberated to tell the story without being confined to a three - act structure .
Sacred Games was shot on different real locations in Mumbai including Byculla , as it was set in a period , which Motwane expressed was a " huge logistical challenge " .
The time period of Gaitonde 's story remained unchanged , while the present - day narrative was shifted to present from early 2000s .
Motwane explained that it was because of a " similar sort of government [ today ] and the vibes are the same , so the threat felt a lot more present " .
Chandra served as a script consultant in the series .
According to Sonawane , " a lot of changes happened on the shoot " .
Several shots were also mentioned in the script , like the introduction of Gaitonde as a kid , which was a top - angle shot , as in the script .
He chose to shoot Sartaj Singh 's sequences with " worn - out but very warm lenses that reflect how nothing is working out in Sartaj 's life . "
Yellow colour palette 's were used in scenes involving Gaitonde because of the " guru that he has begun to follow .
"
Bajaj shot for 27 days , but left after he was involved in another project .
After which Fonseca shot the rest of the scenes .
He used spherical lenses to shot in order to " demarcate " the world .
The shootout sequence at Gaitonde 's house , was shot at three different locations with long takes on Steadicam and hand - held shots .
One of the scene with Sait involving frontal nudity , was shot in seven takes .
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
In September 2018 , it was announced that the series has been renewed for another season .
A 58 second teaser was launched on 21 September .
Kashyap will continue to direct while Neeraj Ghaywan will replace Motwane as the director .
Sobhita Dhulipala will feature as a new character .
The filming began in November 2018 with Siddiqui filming his portion in Nairobi , Kenya while Khan in Mumbai .
It was shot in a 50 day schedule with Ghaywan filming with Khan .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Sacred Games is the first Netflix original series from India .
In February , 2018 , Netflix announced three new series , along with four others , making a total of seven series coming out of India .
The first look of the main three characters : Singh , Gaitonde and Mathur were released by Netflix on 23 February 2018 .
It had individual stills of a blood spattered Singh , a perplexed looking Mathur and kurta pyjama clad Gaitonde .
On 4 May 2018 , the 55 second long teaser video was released .
It was followed by the release of the official trailer on 5 June 2018 .
The series premiered in Mumbai on 28 June 2018 at the MAMI film festival , where only first four episodes were shown .
The series was released on 6 July 2018 across 191 countries on Netflix with subtitles in more than 20 languages .
Post the release , several mashup videos , art works and memes related to Sacred Games were released and circulated on social media .
On 10 July 2018 , the Indian National Congress party member Rajeev Kumar Sinha , lodged a First information report against Netflix , the showrunners and Nawazuddin Siddiqui , for allegedly insulting former Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi in one of the scenes .
Another complaint was lodged on 11 July 2018 by the President of Youth Indian National Trade Union Congress and All Indian Cine Worker 's Association , Suresh Shyamal Gupta for allegedly insulting Gandhi .
On 14 July 2018 , Rahul Gandhi took to Twitter to respond to the controversy by stating that freedom " is a fundamental democratic right " and said : " My father lived and died in the service of India .
The views of a character on a fictional web series can never change that . "
On 15 July 2018 , Sinha decided to withdraw the complaint following Gandhi 's tweet .
Netflix informed the Delhi High Court on 19 July 2018 that a change had been incorporated in the English subtitle to remedy the alleged insult to Gandhi .
Sacred Games was also subjected to piracy .
The vice president of Netlfix Todd Yellin revealed that Sacred Games was watched by twice as many people outside of India .
SOUNDTRACK RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Upon release , the series garnered positive reviews from critics , with praise to the performances .
The show holds a 90 % certified fresh rating on the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes based on 20 reviews , with an average rating of 6.62 out of 10 .
The critical consensus reads : " Gorgeous , grim , and unexpected , Sacred Games is saved from its procedural premise by its dense plotting and superb cast . "
Raja Sen gave a positive response and wrote : " It is not an immediately explosive concept , unfolding more like a thriller by numbers , helped along by strong performances and some nimble direction . "
Jai Arjun Singh felt that the series replicated the novel 's profanity very intricately and said that the " series uses its own methods to stress the idea of religion as something that can be both nurturing and cannibalistic " .
Ektaa Malik of The Indian Express called the series " edgier and more layered " , but said : " For those who have read the original source material — the novel Sacred Games — they might find the series a bit jarring with regards to certain plot developments . "
Manjusha Radhakrishnan of Gulf News cited the series as an " edgy , thrilling winner " and said that Khan and Siddiqui are in their " top form " .
Saibal Chatterjee of NDTV gave a positive response and wrote : " The series has the potential to wean back viewers who have been driven away from television by drab soap operas and trite entertainment formats . "
Dipti Kharude of The Quint commended the writing of the series and said , " What 's commendable is that Sacred Games chooses compassion over glorification . "
Swetha Ramakrishnan of Firstpost called it a " high benchmark for India 's first Netflix original .
" She further said that the show gives " due diligence with high production value and an investment into the right parameters — writing , acting and direction . "
Shristi Negi of CNN - News18 reviewed and mentioned that the show " totally grips you from start to finish " .
Ankur Pathak of HuffPost gave a positive response and wrote : " At the surface , Sacred Games appears to be a standard cat - and - mouse chase but the show 's probing , introspective nature turns a clichéd crime - saga to a biting commentary on the zeitgeist .
Its relevance to our current moment can not be overstated .
"
Siddhant Adlakha of IGN felt the series depicted women as the " collateral damage to the stories of men . "
He went on to say that the series is " alluring , but frustrating . "
Aditya Shrikrishna of The New Indian Express praised the performances of Kubbra Sait as Kukoo and Jitendra Joshi as Katekar , He called Katekar " probably the best translated character and storyline from the novel to the screen .
"
Urvi Parikh called the series " gripping , " intriguing " and " absolutely thrilling " and " exactly the Web series we have been waiting for " .
Shweta Keshri of India Today praised Siddiqui 's acting and said that he " makes you believe that no one could have played Gaitonde better . "
Tanul Thakur of The Wire felt the series was a " much leaner , condensed version of its source , trying to locate the novel 's moral and philosophical centre " .
He called it a " commendable , much - needed approach " that seems to be in a " needless hurry " .
Prashant Rao of The Hindu expressed that series captures the spirit of the book .
He also praised Khan 's performance , stating that he " brings alive his character 's midlife crises and the many compromises Singh makes to inhabit a ' good cop ' zone with skill and dexterity . "
Tim Goodman of The Hollywood Reporter stated that " there are clear flaws " while also mentioning that " there 's something riveting about India 's bleaker , darker heart being exposed as opposed to some upbeat , colorful explosion of dance scenes " .
Mike Hale of The New York Times said that , " despite its verve and visual inventiveness , the series feels muddled and a little wearying at times
" Adam Starkey of Metro wrote that the dual narratives , while occasionally jarring , are equally compelling .
Taylor Antrim called the series " mesmerizing " and " addictive " , he further said that it is " bollywood maximalism meets downbeat Euro noir meets Hollywood gangster epic " .
Steve Greene of IndieWire felt the series was a " surface - level telling of a story that wants to have so much more in its grasp . "
He also noted the amount of violence depicted .
John Doyle of The Globe and Mail noted that the series " sprawls from thriller to dense character study to brooding meditation on the roots of India 's political corruption . "
He , however pointed out that some elements in the story " will puzzle viewers not familiar with India 's tangled religious tensions and caste system . "
Kaitlin Reily of Refinery29 called it a " juicy crime thriller that combines a hardboiled detective story with magical realism . "
Lincoln Michel of GQ called it the " best Netflix original in years . "
AWARDS Section::::Awards .
Sacred Games won the Best Drama Award at the News18 iReel Awards .
It won five awards from 11 nominations including Best Actor ( Drama ) for Nawazuddin Siddiqui , Best Supporting Actor for Jitendra Joshi , Best Writing ( Drama ) , Best Ensemble Cast , and Best Series ( Drama ) .
Kashyap won the Best Direction ( fiction ) Award while Aarti Bajaj won the Award for Best Editing at the inaugural Asian Academy Creative Awards .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS