PENNY ON M.A.R.S. Penny on M.A.R.S. is an English - language teen dramedy series of the Walt Disney Company , which is produced in Italy .
The series is a spin - off of the successful Italian series Alex & Co. of the Disney Channel .
The series is commissioned by 3Zero2 in cooperation with The Walt Disney Company Italy .
The premiere of the series was on May 7 , 2018 on Disney Channel Italy .
In the UK , the series premiered on June 4 , 2018 on Disney Channel .
On April 10 , 2018 , the production of the second season was announced .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Penny passes the auditions to enter the M.A.R.S. high school , one of the most exclusive performing arts schools in the world .
The M.A.R.S. has strict rules and is very competitive , Penny and her schoolmates have to pass a daily test .
But Penny is special , she has a secret that must keep over all : she is the daughter of Bakìa , one of the biggest pop stars of the moment , who has managed to make nobody know about her daughter by enrolling her in a boarding school in Switzerland so that she could have a " normal " childhood and not hinder her career .
Now Penny is growing up and wants to follow her dream : attending the M.A.R.S. together with Camilla , her best friend , and finally live like all the girls of her age .
That 's why she signs up for the M.A.R.S. with a fake name , she wants to test her talent and make it by herself without having to deal with her mother 's cumbersome success .
The only one at the M.A.R.S. who knows her real identity is Camilla .
They are like sisters and nothing can separate them , or that 's what they thought until they fall in love with the same boy at school , the charming Sebastian .
And while she follows her dream , Penny will also have a mystery to solve : finding out who her father is .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN CHARACTERS Section::::Cast and characters .
Section::::Main Characters . !
rowspan="2"Character !
rowspan="2"Actor !
colspan="3"Seasons ! 1 RECURRING CHARACTERS Section::::Recurring Characters . !
rowspan="2"Character !
rowspan="2"Actor !
colspan="3"Seasons ! 1 PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In April 2017 , it was announced that The Walt Disney Company Italy planned to produce an English language spin - off from the successful series Alex &
Co. The start of shooting for the 17-part first season was planned for Autumn 2017 .
Penny on M.A.R.S. was produced in English instead of Italian because it was believed that the series could be sold better internationally .
The characters Penny , Camilla , Bakìa and Freddy Wolf from Penny on M.A.R.S. had performances in the special episodes ( the last episodes ) of Alex & Co. , in which the spin - off series was introduced .
On June 29 , 2017 , the spin - off series after the last episode of Alex & Co. was officially announced in a teaser , thereby also announcing the title Penny on M.A.R.S ..
The first table read for the first season was on September 20 , 2017 .
Shooting for the first season began on September 28 , 2017 and ended on December 15 , 2017 .
The shooting took place in Milan and the surrounding area .
The backdrop of the Music Arts Reiner School ( short M.A.R.S. ) is the building of the design department of the Bovisa 's headquarters of the Polytechnic University of Milan .
EPISODES SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The first album from the series was released on May 4 , 2016 in Italy .
It contains the following list of songs : REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS