DIANE ( CAM SONG )
" Diane " is co - written and recorded by American country artist Cam and is the lead single from her second album .
The song was written with Tyler Johnson and Jeff Bhasker , who also produced the track . "
Diane " is a country pop song that flips the script on Dolly Parton 's country classic " Jolene " .
BACKGROUND AND COMPOSITION Section::::Background and composition .
" Diane " is a hard - charging , empowering country pop track in which Cam sings about an affair to an unsuspecting wife once she realizes the man she was seeing is married .
Cam noted to Rolling Stone Country that the song is her " response to Dolly Parton 's ' Jolene . '
It 's the apology so many spouses deserve , but never get .
The other woman is coming forward to break the news to the wife about an affair , respecting her enough to have that hard conversation , once she realized he was married .
Because everyone should be able to decide their own path in life , based on the truth .
Women especially should do this for each other , since our self - worth can still be so wrapped up in our partners .
And in true country fashion , I 've set the whole raw story to upbeat music , so you can dance while you process it all . "
In April 2018 , " Diane " was added to the BBC Radio 2 A - list .
LIVE PERFORMANCES Section::::Live performances .
Cam promoted " Diane " with several live performances including on Good Morning America , The Late Late Show with James Corden , and as a duet with a contestant on the sixteenth season of American Idol .
On her Good Morning America appearance , she was surprised with a pre - recorded message from Dolly Parton .
MUSIC VIDEO Section::::Music video .
The music video for " Diane , " which was shot in Los Angeles , California and directed by Daniel Carberry , premiered on February 9 , 2018 .
In it , Cam is shown playing the role of ' the other woman ' and confronting the wife of the man who she cheated with .
Scenes of her performing on stage in a nightclub are interspersed between the storyline .
CHARTS Section::::Charts .
!
scope="col " Chart ( 2017–18 ) ! scope="col " Peak position REFERENCES