LET THERE BE LIGHT ( 2017 FILM )
Let There Be Light is a 2017 American Christian drama film directed by and starring Kevin Sorbo and written by Dan Gordon and Sam Sorbo .
The plot follows an atheist who goes through a near - death experience in an auto accident and converts to Christianity .
Sean Hannity executive produced and appears in the film .
Dionne Warwick and Travis Tritt also have roles in the film .
It was released in the United States on October 27 , 2017 .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
Outspoken atheist
Dr. Sol Harkens is having a debate with a Christian leader .
After Harkens is considered to have won the debate , he attends a party for his book .
He double fists cocktails while trying to get his girlfriend to come home with him that night ; she refuses .
Disappointed , Harkens heads home in a drunken haze to sleep it off .
On the way home , his publicist calls him to arrange more parties to increase his exposure .
Since he was already drunk after leaving his party and continues to drink on the way home , he veers off and crashes into a construction site .
Suddenly surrounded by a carnival - like light tunnel , he sees hallucinations of his young son David , who died a few years prior from cancer .
His son enthusiastically claims that he is alright and he should let God 's love fill him , proclaiming " Let there be light ! "
as Dr. Harkens comes out of unconsciousness .
After being clinically dead for 4 minutes , he awakens to find his Christian ex - wife at his side , and tells her that he saw their son .
His doctor diagnoses his visions as merely adrenal brain surges that are caused in times of trauma .
Harkens continues to struggle with his crisis of science versus faith .
After his ex - wife shows up at his house to check on him , he decides to go and talk to pastor and former mob member Vinny at a church .
After hearing the resurrection story , he has an epiphany and is baptized again as a believing Christian .
After multiple visits from his ex - wife , he decides to rekindle their relationship for each other so they can be a family again with their two surviving sons .
Shortly after proposing again and accepting , his soon - to - be - again wife Katy comes down with cancer , which is past the point of treatment .
Fox News ' Sean Hannity hears of Dr. Harkens ' story and asks him to come onto his program because he considers his story of great merit .
Harkens announces a campaign of world peace called the " Let there be light " campaign .
He believes that if anyone in the world shines their lights to the sky at night that it could be a bolster to world unity .
During the night of the event the simultaneous action of the world shining their light to the heavens is visible from space .
Meanwhile back home , the newly remarried Harkens are having a night of family time singing Christmas songs outside .
The dying and weakened Mrs. Harkens suddenly dies in Dr. Harkens ' arms .
CAST * Kevin Sorbo as Dr. Sol Harkens
* Sam Sorbo as Katy Harkens * Daniel Roebuck as Norm
* Donielle Artese as Tracee
* Gary Grubbs as Dr. Fornier * Travis Tritt as Dr. Corey
* Joe Herrera as Dr. Shell
* Leander Suleiman as Dr. Patel
* Walnette Marie Santiago as Cat Ryerson * Olivia Fox as Vanessa * Dionne Warwick as Herself
* Mona Amein as Sally * Sherri Eakin as Waitress
* Michael Franzese as Pastor Vinny
* Sean Hannity as Himself RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film was released in the United States on October 27 , 2017 .
Over its opening weekend the film made $ 1.9 million from 373 theaters ( a per - theater average of $ 5,071 ) , finishing 11th at the box office .
In its second weekend the film was added to 269 theaters and dropped just 1.9 % to $ 1.7 million , finishing 10th at the box office .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 50 % based on 6 reviews , with an average rating of 4.6/10 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS