DOKI DOKI LITERATURE CLUB !
Doki Doki Literature Club !
is a 2017 American visual novel developed by Team Salvato for Microsoft Windows , macOS , and Linux .
The story follows a male high school student who joins the school 's Literature Club and interacts with its four female members .
The game features a mostly linear story , with some alternative scenes and endings depending on the choices the player makes .
While it appears at first glance to be a lighthearted dating simulator , it is in fact a psychological horror game that involves heavy use of breaking the fourth wall .
The game was developed in an estimated two - year period by a team led by Dan Salvato , known previously for his modding work for Super Smash Bros. Melee .
According to Salvato , the inspiration for the game came from his mixed feelings toward anime , and a fascination for surreal and unsettling experiences .
Upon its release , Doki Doki Literature Club ! received critical praise for its metafictional and horror elements , with PC Gamer calling it " one of the most surprising games of the year . "
GAMEPLAY Section::::Gameplay .
Doki Doki Literature Club !
is a visual novel , as such , the majority of the gameplay consists of the player reading the game 's story with little impact on what direction the plot takes .
At certain points in the game the player is prompted to make decisions which may affect how the story progresses .
The game also features a poetry writing mechanic as part of the Literature Club .
The player is given a list of various words to select from that will make up their poem .
Each girl in the Literature Club has different word preferences , and will react when the player picks a word that they like .
The player is able to create poems for only three of the four girls , which serves as a plot point in the game .
Additional scenes can be unlocked for each girl if the player writes poems targeted at that girl 's tastes , and chooses the correct dialogue options .
If the player goes through all of the options , they will unlock an alternative ending .
At one point in the game , the player is required to access the game 's files and delete a specific file in order to progress further ; throughout the game , files will be added and deleted automatically from the game .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The protagonist is invited by his childhood friend , Sayori , to join their high school 's literature club .
The protagonist then meets the other members of the club : Natsuki , Yuri , and the club president Monika .
The protagonist starts to participate in the club 's activities such as writing and sharing poetry , and grows close to the four girls .
Many of the poems written by the four girls foreshadow or hint at their troubled home life , or depressed state .
Whilst preparing for an upcoming school festival , Sayori reveals that she suffers from depression and confesses her love for the protagonist .
As the day of the festival approaches , Sayori 's usually bittersweet poem is replaced with a dark and morbid note repeatedly telling someone to get out of her head .
When Sayori does not answer his text messages , the protagonist leaves the club meeting and rushes to Sayori 's home , where he discovers that she has hanged herself .
The game begins to glitch , and as the protagonist wonders if they could have saved Sayori , the game abruptly ends .
The player is sent back to the main menu , with all previous save files erased .
The game starts as usual , but what used to be Sayori 's text and name is replaced with unreadable text .
The game suddenly glitches and restarts ; however , Sayori is absent , and any previous references to her are either completely removed or replaced by glitches and meshes of portions of other characters ' sprites .
Monika instead invites the protagonist to the club .
Unsettling events begin occurring : the game rewinds after the protagonist finds Yuri cutting herself , features disturbing bad endings such as Natsuki 's neck snapping , and refuses to accept dialog options that do not favor Monika .
Yuri becomes increasingly psychotic and obsessive towards the protagonist , brutally insulting Natsuki and Monika and trying to keep the protagonist with her .
Just before the festival , Yuri presents the protagonist with a stained , illegible poem , and apparitions of a faceless Natsuki appear .
Yuri later confesses her love to the protagonist , then stabs herself to death , out of grief or excitement , depending on whether the protagonist accepted her confession .
Due to another glitch , the protagonist unwittingly spends the weekend sitting by her body .
On Monday , Natsuki enters , vomits at the sight of Yuri 's corpse , and flees .
Monika then appears , apologizes , and deletes the " character files " for Yuri and Natsuki , causing the game to restart once again .
After being automatically taken to a new file , the protagonist is placed in a room with Monika seated across from them .
Monika explains that she is aware that she is a character in a game , and that she is able to manipulate the game 's files to alter the other characters ' personalities or erase them altogether .
She admits to making Sayori " more and more depressed " and " amplifying Yuri 's obsessive personality " to make them more unlikable so the player would focus on her instead , having had an identity crisis from not being designed as a potential love interest .
She confesses her love directly not to the protagonist , but to the player .
Monika will sit and talk to the player indefinitely about various topics until the player manually enters the game 's directory and deletes Monika 's character file .
Upon doing this , the game glitches once more and Monika panics as she is deleted from the game 's world .
Monika initially lashes out at the player , but after a pause , she confesses that she still loves the player , and expresses regret for everything she has done .
Monika then restores the other girls , and removes herself from the game .
POSSIBLE
ENDINGS Section::::Possible endings .
Choices the player can make in the playthrough can lead to three possible conclusions .
The first ( and default ) ending , following Monika 's removal from the directory , the game starts over once again with Sayori , Yuri and Natsuki all alive , playing out similarly to the initial playthrough .
Shortly after meeting everyone , Sayori tells the player that now that she is the president of the literature club , she knows everything about the game and what happened with Monika , and intends to do the same thing Monika did .
Monika immediately intervenes once more via text prompt and deletes Sayori to save the player .
Monika then speaks audibly to the player , and sings a song titled " Your Reality " to the player while the credits roll and Monika slowly deletes the game .
After the credits , the game displays a note from Monika , stating that she has disbanded the literature club because " there is no happiness " in it .
Another possible ending may take place if Monika 's character file is prematurely deleted before starting a new game , resulting in Sayori becoming the default leader of the club .
Upon realizing the true nature of the game and her role in it , Sayori will panic and hijack the controls , deletes all the character files , and forcefully closes it .
Opening the game again will result to a black end screen followed by an image of Sayori hanging herself , staying with the screen after 10 minutes will reveal a message — " Now everyone can be happy . "
However , an alternative ending may occur if the player has viewed all of the optional scenes in a single playthrough , which requires saving and loading at several points before witnessing Sayori 's initial suicide .
Sayori instead accepts the nature of her reality and tearfully expresses her gratitude to the player for trying to make all of the girls happy .
She bids goodbye , hoping that the player will visit once again sometime and concluding that the girls all love the player before deleting the game herself .
After the credits , which also feature " Your Reality " , the player is presented with a thank - you note from the game 's developer , Dan Salvato .
In all outcomes , further playthroughs require the game to be re - installed or hard reset .
DEVELOPMENT AND RELEASE Section::::Development and release .
Dan Salvato spent an estimated two years working on Doki Doki Literature Club !
in secret before releasing it as his first game .
Prior to its release , Salvato was known for creating the FrankerFaceZ extension for Twitch.tv , his modding work in the Super Smash Bros scene , and for his custom Super Mario Maker levels .
Doki Doki Literature Club !
was first released on September 22 , 2017 on itch.io , and was later also released on Steam .
The game is available as freeware with an optional pay what you want model .
Paying US$ 10 or more unlocks a bonus " Fan Pack " that includes desktop and mobile wallpapers , the game 's official soundtrack , and a digital concept art booklet .
Salvato cited his " love - hate relationship " with anime as inspiration for creating Doki Doki Literature Club ! .
Discussing the horror elements of the game , Salvato explained that he was inspired by " things that are scary because they make you uncomfortable , not because they shove scary - looking things in your face . "
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
After its release , Doki Doki Literature Club !
quickly gained a cult following .
Gita Jackson from Kotaku described Doki Doki Literature Club !
as " a truly special game , " adding " if you like horror games , especially ones that really get under your skin , please check out Doki Doki Literature Club . "
GQs
Tom Philip called it " one of the scariest games I have ever played . "
He went on to praise the game 's writing saying it contained " some of the most wickedly inventive narrative techniques I 've ever seen , " but commented that at times it felt like " a slog , clicking through endless amounts of inane , flirty conversation about poetry . "
In its first three months of release , Doki Doki Literature Club ! was downloaded over one million times , and exceeded two million downloads about a month later .
At IGN 's Best of 2017
Awards , the game won the People 's Choice Award each for " Best PC Game " , " Best Adventure Game " ( for which it was also a runner - up ) , " Best Story " , and " Most Innovative " .
EGMNow ranked the game 16th in their list of the 25 Best Games of 2017 .
It won the " Matthew Crump Cultural Innovation Award " and was nominated for " Trending Game of the Year " at the 2018 SXSW Gaming Awards .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS