NEVER BE THE SAME ( CAMILA CABELLO SONG ) "
Never Be the Same " is a song by Cuban - American singer Camila Cabello from her debut studio album , Camila ( 2018 ) .
The song was written by Cabello , Noonie Bao and Sasha Yatchenko , in collaboration with its producers Frank Dukes and the production duo Jarami , formed by Leo Rami Dawod and Jacob Ludwig Olofsson .
It was released digitally on December 7 , 2017 from the album 's pre - order and was sent to US contemporary hit radio on January 9 , 2018 , as the album 's second single .
Cabello gave her first televised performance of the song on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon in January 2018 .
The song has reached the top 10 in Australia , Ireland , New Zealand , the UK and the US .
A second version of the single , featuring country singer Kane Brown , was released on April 27 , 2018 .
COMPOSITION Section::::Composition .
" Never Be the Same " has been described as a " dark " pop ballad .
A NME writer described it as " bombastic " electro .
The upbeat track features Cabello singing falsetto in the pre - chorus .
According to sheet music published by Sony / ATV Music Publishing on Musicnotes.com , " Never Be the Same " is composed in the key of C major and set in common time at a slow tempo of 65 beats per minute .
Cabello 's voice ranges from a low of D to a high of G , and the music has a C — G — Dm — F chord progression .
Additionally , it features booming drums and echoed effects .
Lyrically , it incorporates themes of a pain - is - pleasure type of love .
The song depicts " a melodrama about addictive love " , as described by a The Daily Telegraph editor .
The album includes two versions of the song .
The first one contains lines such as " Nicotine , heroin , morphine
, you 're all I need , " which is substituted in the radio edit version : " Nicotine , rushing me , touching me " .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Newsdays Glenn Gamboa wrote in his album review , " Cabello is at her peak on [ " Never Be the Same " ] which shows off what sets her apart from the pop pack .
[ ... ] That she can quickly switch to her full voice for the desperate chorus is the mark of a star . "
In Rolling Stone , Rob Sheffield considered that Cabello " really hits her stride in " Never Be the Same , " which sounds like Brian Eno 's alien - prog masterwork Another Green World souped up into sputtering glitz - pop [ ... ]
It 's [ Cabello ] at her best – even at her most tormented , she sounds totally confident and totally herself . "
Regarding the second version featuring Kane Brown , Chris Parton of Rolling Stone commented , " his inclusion gives the love - struck track an addictive new layer of intrigue , as [ Brown ] croons and shows off a much brighter , more expressive vocal register than he does on " What Ifs " , his chart - topping duet with Lauren Alaina . "
In an unfavorable review , Patrick Ryan of USA Today felt the song was " overproduced " with " frequently indecipherable lyrics " .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
+ Year - end lists !
Publication !
Accolade !
Rank ! class="unsortable
" + Awards !
Year !
Organization !
Award !
Result !
Ref . !
scope="row " 2018 People 's Choice Awards Music Video of 2018 COMMERCIAL PERFORMANCE Section::::Commercial performance .
The song entered at number 61 on the US Billboard Hot 100 as the week 's top debut with 30,000 copies sold and 6.1 million streams for its first week of release .
It fell to number 98 in its second week on the Hot 100 .
The song fell off the chart the following week ; however , it later re - entered at number 71 , following the premiere of the unofficial music video posted on Cabello 's personal YouTube channel .
Following the release of the parent album and being sent to radio as a single , " Never Be the Same " ascended from number 65 to number 30 , becoming her fourth solo top 40
Hot 100 entry .
In its 20th charting week , it ascended from number 13 to 6 , aided by the Kane Brown remix , thus becoming her third top 10 as a solo artist .
The song has also been certified Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) .
It became her third single to reach number one on the Mainstream Top 40 airplay chart , making Cabello the sixth solo female to top that chart with the first two singles from her debut album .
It has spent a total of four week atop the Mainstream Top 40 chart .
In the United Kingdom , " Never Be the Same " entered the UK Singles Chart at number 41 on the chart dated December 21 , 2017 .
It rose to number seven in its sixth week , following the release of the album .
The song has been certified Gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) .
MUSIC VIDEO Section::::Music video .
An accompanying but unofficial music video for " Never Be the Same " was released on Cabello 's personal YouTube channel on December 29 , 2017 .
The video is a montage of real footage , which includes Cabello 's infancy , childhood and adolescence .
It mainly includes footage from moments she had in 2017 , such as receiving awards at the 2017 MTV EMAs and Billboard Women in Music , performing live and also clips from her previous music videos , " Crying in the Club " and " Havana " .
The official music video , directed by Grant Singer , was released on March 8 , 2018 .
The video features a mix of professional shots with Cabello wearing couture in modern landscapes , juxtaposed against amateurish footage of her in a robe in a hotel room .
LIVE PERFORMANCES Section::::Live performances .
Cabello gave the first televised performance of the song on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon on January 10 , 2018 .
She sung in front of a screen that projected clips of herself , Marilyn Monroe 's movie scenes , storms and a variety of landscapes .
She also performed the song on Good Morning America , The Ellen DeGeneres Show and Dancing on Ice .
TRACK LISTING
CHARTS
WEEKLY CHARTS
Section::::Charts .
Section::::Weekly charts . ! scope="col " Chart ( 2018 ) ! scope="col " Peak position ! scope="row " Argentina Anglo ( Monitor Latino ) ! scope="row " Colombia ( National - Report ) ! scope="row " Croatia ( HRT ) ! scope="row " Ecuador ( National - Report ) ! scope="row " France ( SNEP ) !
scope="row
" Greece ( IFPI ) ! scope="row " Latvia ( Latvijas Top 40 ) ! scope="row " Lebanon ( Lebanese Top 20 ) ! scope="row " Malaysia ( RIM ) ! scope="row " Mexico Airplay ( Billboard ) ! scope="row " Romania ( Airplay 100 ) ! scope="row " Singapore ( RIAS ) ! scope="row " Slovenia ( SloTop50 ) ! scope="row " Venezuela English ( Record Report ) YEAR - END CHARTS Section::::Year - end charts . ! scope="col " Chart ( 2018 ) ! scope="col " Position !
scope="row " Canada ( Canadian Hot 100 ) ! scope="row " New Zealand ( Recorded Music NZ ) ! scope="row " US Billboard Hot 100 ! scope="row " US Mainstream Top 40
( Billboard ) CERTIFICATIONS Section::::Certifications . !
scope="row
" Portugal ( AFP )
Gold 5,000 RELEASE HISTORY Section::::Release history . ! scope="col " Region !
scope="col " Date ! scope="col " Format ! scope="col " Version ! scope="col " Label ! scope="col " ! scope="row
" Various ! scope="row " United States !
scope="row " Italy ! scope="row " Various SEE ALSO
* List of number - one digital songs of 2018 ( U.S. )
* List of Adult Top 40 number - one songs of the 2010s
* List of Billboard Mainstream Top 40 number - one songs of 2018 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS