LIST OF TEAMS TO OVERCOME 3–1 SERIES DEFICITS
The following is the list of teams to overcome 3–1 series deficits by winning three straight games to win a best - of - seven playoff series .
In the history of major North American pro sports , teams that were down 3–1 in the series came back and won the series 52 times , more than half of them were accomplished by National Hockey League ( NHL ) teams .
Teams overcame 3–1 deficit in the final championship round eight times , six were accomplished by Major League Baseball ( MLB ) teams in the World Series .
Teams overcoming 3–0 deficit by winning four straight games were accomplished five times , four times in the NHL and once in MLB .
The Boston Red Sox of MLB and the Vancouver Canucks of NHL each overcame 3–1 deficits the most at three times , while the Washington Capitals of NHL blew 3–1
leads the most at five times , followed by the St. Louis Cardinals of MLB at four times ( including twice in the World Series ) .
Two teams have overcome 3–1 deficits multiple times in the single playoffs : the Kansas City Royals of MLB in 1985 and the Minnesota Wild of the NHL in 2003 .
Two teams have also overcome 3 - 1 deficits in a single playoffs only to have the favor returned to them : the Golden State Warriors of the NBA in 2016 , and the Vancouver Canucks of the NHL in 2003 .
MAJOR LEAGUE BASEBALL Section::::Major League Baseball .
MLB teams have overcome 3–1 deficits 13 times ( including 3–0 deficit 1 time ) , six of which occurred in the World Series .
This does not count the 1903 World Series , in which the Boston Americans ( later known as the Red Sox ) came back from down 3 games to 1 against the Pittsburgh Pirates , as that series was a best - of - nine series . !
Year and series ! !
Winner that overcame deficit ! !
Loser that blew lead ! !
Note(s ) NATIONAL BASKETBALL ASSOCIATION Section::::National Basketball Association .
NBA teams have overcome 3–1 deficits 11 times , only one of which occurred in the NBA Finals . !
Year and series ! !
Winner that overcame deficit ! !
Loser that blew lead ! !
Note(s ) NATIONAL HOCKEY LEAGUE
Section::::National Hockey League .
NHL teams have overcome 3–1 deficits 28 times ( including 3–0 deficits 4 times ) , only one of which occurred in the Stanley Cup Finals . !
Year and series ! !
Winner that overcame deficit ! !
Loser that blew lead ! !
Notes
EXTERNAL LINKS
* History of 3 - 1 World Series comebacks * NBA Playoff 3 - 1 Comebacks – SI.com
* NHL Stanley Cup Playoff Comebacks – Hockey - Reference.com