KEEPING FAITH ( TV SERIES )
Keeping Faith , ( or original title , translates to " One Wednesday Morning " ) is a Welsh thriller television series , created by Matthew Hall and produced by Vox Pictures .
Un Bore Mercher was first broadcast on S4C on 5 November 2017 .
Pip Broughton directed six of the eight episodes ; Andy Newbery the other two .
The series stars Eve Myles as Faith Howells .
She is a solicitor at a family - run law firm .
Evan , her husband , disappears whilst she is on maternity leave following the birth of their third child .
The series co - stars Hannah Daniel , Matthew Gravelle , Bradley Freegard , Mark Lewis Jones , Mali Harries and Aneirin Hughes .
The series was filmed concurrently in two languages .
This programme is the second in a season of bilingual dramas set to premiere back - to - back on S4C.
The initial Welsh broadcasts on S4C carried entirely English subtitles , while repeat airings carried encoded English subtitles .
The series has been available on the BBC iPlayer as part of the BBC 's ongoing relationship with S4C. Renamed Keeping Faith , the English - language version premiered on BBC Wales on 13 February 2018 .
The show was extremely popular in Wales , with an average of 300,000 viewers per episode , making it the most popular show on BBC Wales for over 25 years .
It also became the most downloaded non - network show on BBC iPlayer , with over 8.5 million downloads as at May 2018 .
Having announced on 15 June 2018 that Keeping Faith would be shown in the whole of the UK on BBC One , its broadcast began on 10 July 2018 .
In the wake of a further report of the series ' string of records , the Head of Commissioning for BBC Wales , Nick Andrews , said that this series has been a real gem from start to finish , and it is testament to the strength of drama coming out of Wales right now .
The first series won three Welsh BAFTAs in 2018 .
Production of a second series began in 2018 .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
The series has generally received favourable responses and was described in The Guardian as , " a bit like Big Little Lies relocated to rural Wales " .
As Un Bore Mercher , the Welsh version of the series gained strong reviews .
Gary Raymond , in Wales Arts Review , wrote : " ... particularly interesting to see a genuine diamond emerge from the coalface in the form of Keeping Faith " and " Social media opinion has been a little more approving " [ than the limited publicity surrounding the series ] .
Lydia Morris at the UK Daily Post wrote that the programme " ... has already proved a hit with TV audiences " .
A review ( under ' Show and Tell ' by Paul Flynn ) in Grazia magazine was headed " Like Broadchurch when it was good , Welsh production Keeping Faith is a TV trailblazer " and was generous with its praise .
Writing in The Times , Nicole Wynne described it as " ...
the dual - language drama that has got box - set Britain gripped " .
On 2 May 2018 , referring to the series ' imminent removal from iPlayer access , Stuart Heritage wrote in the ' I ' " Watch this game - changing thriller while you still can " . ]
In the Daily Mail , Benji Wilson wrote that Keeping Faith " ...
looks set to take Broadchurch 's crown " .
Jon Coates in the Express wrote " Keeping Faith 's unprecedented success ... has led to a primetime run on BBC One starting on Thursday [ 12 July 2018 ] , with a second series due to begin filming this autumn . "
In July 2018 , a Guardian review said " ... already a huge iPlayer hit , this Carmarthen - set drama about a vanished husband is realistic and beautifully shot ... " and " It looks real and brilliant and Welsh " . '
crimefictionlover ' wrote : " The BBC has a secret ...
it 's worth seeking out " .
The first series won three Welsh BAFTAs in 2018 :
Best Actress ( Eve Myles ) , Best Writer ( Matthew Hall ) and Original Music ( Amy Wadge and Laurence Love Greed ) .
CAST * Eve Myles as Faith Howells ; solicitor , mother of three and wife of Evan Howells * Hannah Daniel as Cerys Jones ; junior associate at Howells * Matthew Gravelle as Constable Terry Price ; husband to Bethan ( Evan 's sister ) and local policeman * Bradley Freegard as Evan Howells ; a solicitor who mysteriously disappears * Mark Lewis Jones as Steve Baldini ; one of Evan 's clients who befriends Faith * Rhian Morgan as Marion Howells ; Evan 's mother * Aneirin Hughes as Tom Howells ; Evan 's father and a former solicitor * Eiry Thomas as DI Susan Williams ; head of the local CID * Mali Harries as Bethan Price ( née Howells ) ; Terry 's wife and Evan 's sister * Alex Harries as Arthur Davies ; a former client of Evan 's , who is homeless * Betsan Llwyd ( Un Bore Mercher)/Suzanne Packer
( Keeping Faith ) as Delyth Lloyd ; secretary at Howells * Catherine Ayers as Lisa Connors ; Faith 's best friend * Richard Elfyn as DCI Huw Parry ; divisional commander and close friend of Tom * Lowri Palfrey as Erin Glynn ; daughter of a local crime lord and a former client of Evan 's * Angeline Ball as Gael Reardon ; widow of Paddy Reardon , who was killed by Erin Glynn EPISODES PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Set in the fictional town of Abercorran — the original name for Laugharne Castle — filming started in the summer of 2017 .
Exterior shots were filmed in Carmarthenshire , with exterior views of Faith 's home situated high up overlooking the estuary and the castle of Laugharne .
Many scenes were shot in Laugharne , also in Carmarthen ; the main square and the historic Guildhall was used as a courtroom .
Also , the Vale of Glamorgan , Pontardawe and Swansea were filming locations .
Other courtroom scenes feature the former courthouse at Swansea .
Studio scenes were filmed at Sony UK Technology Centre 's Ffilm Factory 35 in Pencoed .
Vox pictures produced the drama with the aid of Nevision , Cinematic Productions , Soundworks and About Premium Content .
The production of the programme was funded through the Welsh Government 's Media Investment Budget , which is advised by Pinewood Pictures , S4C and BBC Wales .
Location assistance was provided by Wales Screen , part of the Welsh Government 's creative industries team , helping to maximise the economic benefits for Wales .
Gwawr Martha Lloyd , S4C Drama Content Commissioner , said of the series ; " We 're very excited about this new and original series that will be premiering on S4C this autumn .
With a stellar cast and a completely compelling story , plot and setting , we 're hoping the audience will grow to love the world and the characters of Un Bore Mercher as much as we in S4C have as we worked to develop the series .
The series intends to take the viewer on a thrilling , emotional and warm journey , which will pull at their heart - strings but will also make them smile along the way . "
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Six original songs were composed for the series by singer - songwriter Amy Wadge .
The English and Welsh soundtracks were released as EPs on iTunes on Friday 9 March 2018 .
The English versions are sung by Amy Wadge and the Welsh versions by Ela Hughes .
The score music was written by Laurence Love Greed .
SECOND SERIES Section::::Second series .
After the final episode of Series 1 , ( April 2018 ) , and with the storyline ending on some significant ' cliff - hangers ' , the voice - over states that a second series is in development ; in an interview with BBC Breakfast , Eve Myles said that Matthew Hall is writing the scripts for the second series .
On 6 May 2018 , Huw Thomas , BBC Wales arts and media correspondent wrote , " A second series is in development , but has not yet been commissioned .
" The second series was in production in October 2018 and will air first on S4C. REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS