SHAQUEM GRIFFIN
Shaquem Alphonso Griffin ( born July 20 , 1995 ) is an American football linebacker for the Seattle Seahawks of the National Football League ( NFL ) .
He is the twin brother of Seahawks cornerback Shaquill Griffin , and both brothers played college football for the University of Central Florida Knights .
As an amputee with one hand , Shaquem Griffin received extensive media coverage as a prospective 2018 NFL Draft pick .
He was selected as a fifth round pick ( 141st overall ) by the Seahawks on April 28 , 2018 , reuniting him with Shaquill .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Shaquem Griffin was born to Tangie and Terry Griffin on July 20 , 1995 , less than two minutes after Shaquill .
Shaquem was born with amniotic band syndrome affecting his left hand , causing his fingers on his left hand not to fully develop .
At age four , his mother found him in the kitchen , attempting to use a butcher 's knife to amputate his own hand because of the pain .
His parents scheduled an amputation the next day .
However , Griffin was able to continue playing sports without his left hand , competing in track , baseball , and football alongside his brother .
COLLEGE CAREER
Section::::College career .
Shaquem and his brother Shaquill were both offered football scholarships at the University of Central Florida ( UCF ) by then - coach George O'Leary , with Shaquill rejecting offers from other teams including the Miami Hurricanes , his dream team , to play with Shaquem .
Griffin spent his whole college career at UCF , totaling 17 sacks and 30 tackles for a loss .
Notable plays also include an interception versus the Temple Owls and a fumble recovery for a touchdown versus the Austin Peay Governors , both during the 2017 season .
In his second season , playing as a redshirt freshman , Shaquem Griffin had a brief stint as a second string player on the depth chart before being demoted to third string and then scout team .
Griffin attributes his rise in his redshirt junior and redshirt senior seasons to Scott Frost 's hiring as head coach for the 2016 and 2017 seasons .
Writing for The Players ' Tribune , Griffin said that , following his winless third season under O'Leary , " Coach Frost came in and brought me back into the light ...
He gave me the opportunity I had been waiting for ever since I first arrived at UCF .
And I took advantage of it . "
Griffin was named the 2018 Peach Bowl Defensive MVP and was the 2016 American Athletic Conference Defensive Player of the Year .
In Griffin 's senior season , UCF went undefeated and subsequently claimed a controversial national championship .
Griffin told Ralph Warner and NFL Network in November 2017 that he planned to continue his football career in the NFL .
Shaquem stayed at UCF one season longer than Shaquill , as Shaquem redshirted his freshman year while Shaquill saw playing time .
Shaquill graduated and was drafted by the Seattle Seahawks in the third round ( 90th overall pick ) of the 2017 NFL Draft , while Shaquem stayed on for his redshirt senior year at UCF .
After the end of his college career , Griffin was named as one of two recipients of the 2019 NCAA Inspiration Award , presented to individuals currently or formerly associated with NCAA athletics for especially inspirational efforts in dealing with life - altering personal situations .
He received the award alongside Maggie Nichols , who was the first individual to report that she had been sexually assaulted by former USA Gymnastics team physician Larry Nassar , who would ultimately be convicted of sexually assaulting several hundred women .
PROFESSIONAL CAREER Section::::Professional career .
Despite not initially receiving an invitation , Griffin participated in the NFL Scouting Combine in March 2018 .
He made headlines for performing 20 reps in the bench press while wearing a prosthesis and for running the 40-yard dash in 4.38 seconds , the fastest time for a linebacker since the NFL has released official statistics .
Despite the fact that he was not projected as a first round pick , Griffin received an invitation to the 2018 NFL Draft , which he accepted on March 29 , 2018 .
Griffin received extensive press and social media coverage leading up to and during the draft , as he would have been the first one - handed player drafted into the NFL if chosen .
On April 28 , 2018 , he was selected by the Seattle Seahawks in the fifth round ( 141st overall ) , reuniting him with his brother Shaquill .
On May 17 , 2018 , Griffin signed a four - year deal worth $ 2.8 million with $ 300,000 guaranteed .
On August 9 , 2018 Griffin made his preseason debut against the Indianapolis Colts in CenturyLink Field , leading his team in tackles with six solo tackles and three assisted tackles .
On August 30 , 2018 , he again led the team in tackles with four solo and three assisted tackles in the final week of the preseason against the Oakland Raiders .
Griffin led the Seahawks in total tackles for the entire 2018 NFL preseason with fifteen , tied with fellow linebacker Austin Calitro .
On September 9 , 2018 , Griffin was named as a starter in the first game of his NFL career due to veteran linebacker
K.J. Wright being unable to play .
He made three solo tackles in the 27 - 24 loss to the Denver Broncos at Mile High Stadium .
WORKS
REFERENCES
NOTES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* UCF Knights bio