ELSA ( ONCE UPON A TIME )
Elsa appears as a recurring character in the fourth season of the television series Once Upon a Time , where she is portrayed by Georgina Haig .
Elsa is loosely based on a character of the same name from the Frozen franchise .
SUMMARY Section::::Summary .
At the end of the show 's third season finale , " There 's No Place Like Home " , Emma Swan ( Snow White and Prince Charming 's daughter ) and Captain Hook accidentally bring back an urn from Rumplestiltskin 's vault after their excursion into the past .
The urn releases a blue liquid that coalesces into Elsa .
She takes off her glove and destroys the urn with an icy blast .
She strides out of the barn , leaving a trail of frozen ground .
In the fourth - season premiere , " A Tale of Two Sisters , " Elsa 's story is shown in the present day as well as flashbacks taking place two years after the events of the film .
In the past , she discovers that her and Anna 's parents set off not on a diplomatic mission , but on a journey to Misthaven — the " Enchanted Forest " where most of Storybrooke 's fairy - tale residents came from — to discover more about Elsa 's powers , with Anna 's travelling to Misthaven to find out more about her parents ' voyage .
In the present , Elsa is frightened by her sudden exposure into the town of modern - day Storybrooke and re - conjures Marshmallow for protection .
Marshmallow is defeated by Regina Mills ( the Evil Queen ) , while Elsa discovers a necklace she gave long ago to Anna in Mr. Gold 's ( Rumplestiltskin 's ) shop , leaving her resolved to learn what happened to her sister .
As the season progresses , Elsa befriends series protagonist Emma Swan , Emma and the series ' central cast resolving the help Elsa find Anna .
The group eventually discovers that a figure named the Snow Queen ( a more faithful adaptation of the original fairy tale 's character ) is somehow responsible for Elsa 's trapping in her urn , a woman with similar powers to Elsa .
They soon discover that the Snow Queen is Elsa 's aunt , Ingrid , who was forgotten from Arendelle when Elsa 's mother , Gerda , used the power of the troll king to erase everyones memory of her , not wishing for the world to remember how Ingrid accidentally killed their third sister , Helga .
Ingrid soon discovered a prophecy that stated she would one day
have the love of her sisters again .
With Ingrid 's sisters dead however , she believed she would be forced to create new sisters .
For this , she chose Emma and Elsa .
Ingrid had stalked Emma her entire life in preparation for the prophecy to become true , and manipulated events in Arendelle to bring Elsa to her .
Being convinced that she could only gain their love when she was the only one left , she obtained a mirror capable of bringing out the worst in people ( the mirror coming directly from The Snow Queen fairy tale ) .
If a piece of the mirror were to get in someones eye , they would see nothing but hatred in the world .
Ingrid had planned to use this on everyone in Storybrooke ( dubbed the Spell of Shattered Sight ) , forcing all of its citizens to kill each other while she , Emma , and Elsa remained immune .
Ingrid had also used this to her advantage on Anna , forcing Anna to trap Elsa in the urn they originally found Elsa in .
Back in Arendelle , Anna ( who has woken up from the spell ) tried to track down a device known as a wishing star , which will have the power to bring her and Kristoff to wherever Elsa is .
It was apparently the necklace Elsa had given Anna long ago , Elsa using it to bring Anna and Kristoff to Storybrooke .
However , the Spell of Shattered Sight had already begun , and the only ones immune to it were Elsa , Emma , and Anna ( Anna because it was already used on her a while ago ) .
Tracking down a note written by Elsa and Anna 's mother right before her death , the three bring it to Ingrid .
It reads that Gerda forgave Ingrid for all that had transpired and still loved her
, Ingrid realizing this was what the prophecy meant by regaining her sister 's love .
Realizing there is no point in killing the town now , the Snow Queen kills herself using the mirror , which deactivates the curse , though a bit of it remained in Storybrooke , reinstating the town line , making it impossible to return to town if you are to leave it .
With the help of Rumplestiltskin , they are able to discover a door that will lead back to Arendelle , though they will not be able to return , as the door will disappear after its use .
Anna and Kristoff depart , while Elsa and Emma share a tearful goodbye before returning to Arendelle with her little sister to attend the long - awaited wedding between Anna and Kristoff .
In " Poor Unfortunate Soul " , it 's revealed that , when Blackbeard attacked Arendelle , Elsa shrunk and trapped him and the Jolly Roger inside a bottle , unknowingly trapping Ariel inside as well .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
With the introduction of Frozen characters , the season 4 of Once Upon a Time saw a 31-percent increase in ratings from the autumn of 2013 ( 9.3 million viewers ) , marking its best ratings in almost two years .
REFERENCES