UNBREAKABLE ( FILM SERIES )
The Unbreakable film series , also referred to as the Eastrail 177 Trilogy , is an American superhero thriller and psychological horror film series , involving the derailment of the fictitious Eastrail # 177 train .
The films were written , produced , and directed by M. Night Shyamalan .
The trilogy consists of Unbreakable ( 2000 ) , Split ( 2016 ) , and Glass ( 2019 ) .
All of the films feature the character David Dunn , and multiple characters have a connection to the Eastrail 177 train disaster featured in the first movie .
The series has been noted for its differences to more traditional superhero movies , with Shyamalan 's work referred to as " the first auteur shared superhero universe " .
It is the first superhero franchise that is written and directed by one person , in comparison to other popular films in the genre .
Shyamalan has noted that while it is based on comic book superheroes , and refers to comic books , it is not actually derived from comic book material itself .
In contrast to most superhero films , the series is also generally grounded in reality , and is seen as a deconstruction of the superhero genre .
The series is thus considered to be a unique take on the superhero genre .
The filmmaker has stated that the films are origin stories , of people with unique gifts , with the intent being to acknowledge that every person has something special about them .
Split has been called the first solo supervillain story .
Writers and fans also referred to the series as the " Eastrail 177 trilogy " , because , as noted , all three main characters were connected to the train in some important way .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
The series originated with the film Unbreakable , directed by Shyamalan and released in 2000 .
When M. Night Shyamalan conceived the idea for Unbreakable , the outline had a comic book 's traditional three - part structure ( the superhero 's " birth " , his struggles against general evil - doers , and the hero 's ultimate battle against the " archenemy " ) .
Finding the birth section most interesting , he decided to write Unbreakable as an origin story .
At the time , comic book themed superhero films were niche , so the film was marketed as a psychological thriller like Shyamalan 's breakout film The Sixth Sense , rather than as a superhero film .
According to Shyamalan , " I was on a conference call with the studio , and they were saying we ca n't mention the word ' comic books ' or ' superheroes ' because it 's too fringe " .
Upon release in 2000 , Bruce Willis revealed that Unbreakable was the first part of a planned trilogy .
Both Willis and Samuel L. Jackson pushed for a sequel or trilogy , with Willis stating " It 's really built as a trilogy , " but Shyamalan expressed uncertainty and said , " I ca n't tell you anything about them .
" Whether the film had a sequel depended upon how it would perform at the box office .
While Unbreakable was a moderate box office success , grossing worldwide on a budget , it performed below expectations , earning about a third of what The Sixth Sense grossed .
Unbreakable gained more popularity over time and subsequently developed a cult following , as the audience for comic book superhero films grew over time .
Out of Shyamalan 's career , some have referred to Unbreakable as his best work .
In terms of superhero films , it was listed in Times list of " Top 10 Superhero Films " of all time , ranked at number four .
Quentin Tarantino also included Unbreakable on his list of top 20 films released since 1992 .
The second film Split originated from the character of Kevin who had been in one of the early drafts of Unbreakable , but Shyamalan had pulled the character out , stating there were balancing issues at that time .
With Split , he brought in some of the scenes he had written for Unbreakable around Kevin .
Split became a box office success , with over 2,000 % return on investment ( ROI ) , making it the most profitable film of 2017 , paving the way for a third film .
While the director Shyamalan himself has stated that he 's usually not a fan of making sequels , the two stars of the series , Bruce Willis and Samuel L. Jackson had asked him to consider making a sequel .
Shyamalan has said he plans on a trilogy of three films , with the third film Glass planned to be release in 2019 , but he may continue making more if the inspiration for writing the material is there .
FILMS UnbreakableSplitGlass UNBREAKABLE ( 2000 )
Section::::Unbreakable ( 2000 ) .
David Dunn is the sole survivor of a devastating train wreck .
Elijah Price is a mysterious stranger who offers a bizarre explanation as to why David escaped without a single scratch , an explanation which threatens to change David 's family and his life forever .
During filming for The Sixth Sense , M. Night Shyamalan approached Bruce Willis for the role of David Dunn .
Sometime after , Samuel L. Jackson alongside Willis , were announced to be the two main leads of the film .
Prior to the film 's production , Jackson met with Willis discussing the script .
Principal photography began April 25 , 2000 , and finished in June the same year .
SPLIT ( 2016 )
Section::::Split ( 2016 ) .
Kevin Wendell Crumb has evidenced 23 personalities to his trusted psychiatrist , Dr. Fletcher , although there remains one still submerged who is set to materialize and dominate all of the others .
Compelled to abduct three teenage girls led by the willful , observant Casey , Kevin reaches a war for survival among all of those contained within him , as well as everyone around him , as the walls between his compartments shatter .
In October 2015 , James McAvoy was cast as the film 's primary antagonist , Kevin Wendell Crumb , originally , Joaquin Phoenix was cast for the role .
The same month , Anya Taylor - Joy , Betty Buckley , Jessica Sula and Haley Lu Richardson were cast in the film .
Following cast announcements , Universal Pictures revealed the films title as Split .
Principal photography began November 2015 and finished in June 2016 .
GLASS ( 2019 )
Section::::Glass ( 2019 ) .
Following the events of Split , security guard David Dunn uses his superstrength and supernatural abilities to track Kevin Wendell Crumb , a disturbed man who has 24 personalities .
Bruce Willis , Samuel L. Jackson , Spencer Treat Clark , Charlayne Woodard , James McAvoy and Anya Taylor - Joy are set to reprise their roles from Unbreakable and Split .
In July 2017 , Sarah Paulson was cast as a new character .
In November , Adam David Thompson was cast in an undisclosed role .
Principal photography began October and finished in December 2017 .
FUTURE Section::::Future .
Although the series is currently slated as a trilogy , Shyamalan mentioned that he would be open to a continuation if the inspiration came to him .
THEMES Section::::Themes .
While the three movies are superhero films , in that unrealistic " super " powers are featured , Shyamalan notes that one of the main themes of the movies is that there are extraordinary powers in everyone .
He also notes that rather than being a " comic book movie " each of them is a movie about comic books .
While the movies are connected , each has a separate style .
Unbreakable is a mystery film , regarding a man who is the sole survivor of a catastrophic train crash .
Split is a horror movie , exploring the origin story of a supervillain , while Shyamalan has stated that Glass will be a different thematic feel as well .
Producer Jason Blum has referred to them as " superhero movies " , noting that they are very different from Marvel Studios ' films .
CAST AND CREW CAST
* A dark grey cell indicates the character has not appeared in that medium .
*
A indicates a voice - only role .
*
A indicates an appearance as a younger version of a pre - existing character .
*
A indicates an appearance in onscreen photographs only .
*
A indicates a cameo appearance .
UnbreakableSplitGlassDavid Dunn !
scope="row " Elijah Price !
Kevin Wendell Crumb !
Joseph Dunn !
Mrs. Price !
Mrs. Crumb !
Casey Cooke !
Audrey Dunn !
Dr. Dubin !
Dr. Mathison !
The Orange Man !
Stadium Drug Dealer / Jai !
Dr. Karen Fletcher !
Claire !
Marcia !
John Cooke !
Mr. Cooke !
Dr. Ellie Staple !
Daryl ADDITIONAL CREW AND PRODUCTION DETAILS Section::::Additional crew and production details . !
width="15 % " Film !
width="15 % " Composer(s ) ! align="center
" Editor ! align="center " Cinematographer ! align="center " Production companies ! align="center " Distributing companies ! align="center " Running time !
Unbreakable !
Split !
Glass RECEPTION BOX OFFICE RECEPTION
Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office reception .
Unbreakable was a moderate box office success , grossing in ticket sales on a budget , but there was minimal profit and it performed below expectations , earning about a third of what The Sixth Sense grossed .
Unbreakable underperformed at the box office due to several reasons , primarily because many people expected it to be a similar film to Shyamalan 's smash success psychological horror film , The Sixth Sense , which it was not .
Split grossed $ 278 million against a $ 9 million budget , becoming a surprise box office success .
Split became a box office success , with over 2,000 % return on investment ( ROI ) , making it the most profitable film of 2017 and the 11th most profitable film of all time . !
Film !
U.S. release date !
Budget !
US gross !
International gross !
Worldwide gross !
Unbreakable !
Split !
Glass !
colspan="2 "
Total !
$ 104 million !
$ 233.1 million !
$ 293.3 million !
$ 526.4 million CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response . !
Film !
Rotten Tomatoes !
Metacritic !
CinemaScore !
Average !
73 % !
62 !
B-
ACCOLADES
Section::::Accolades .
! scope="col " Film ! scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Category ! scope="col " Recipients ! scope="col " Result ! scope="col " class="unsortable " References ! rowspan=10
Unbreakable !
rowspan=4 Split
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Official Split website