DAY OF THE DEAD :
BLOODLINE Day of the Dead
: Bloodline is a 2018 action horror film directed by Hèctor Hernández Vicens , and written by Mark Tonderai and Lars Jacobson , based on characters created by George A. Romero .
The film stars Johnathon Schaech , Sophie Skelton , Marcus Vanco , and Jeff Gum .
It is one of two remakes of Romero 's original 1985 film Day of the Dead : the first , also titled Day of the Dead , was released in 2008 , Day of the Dead : Bloodline on January 5 , 2018 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Medical student Zoe Parker reluctantly attends a party at her medical school , Whittendale University , at the behest of her friends .
While retrieving a keg of beer from the morgue , Zoe is confronted by her disturbed patient Max , who is obsessively in love with her and whose blood has an unusually high level of antibodies .
He attacks and attempts to rape her , but a corpse reanimates and bites into Max 's throat .
Zoe flees and warns everyone at the party , but hordes of the corpses , later dubbed rotters , burst in and kill all except Zoe , who escapes through a window , only to find the city besieged by rotters .
The survivors of the initial outbreak are sent to refugee camps .
Zoe is sent to High Rock Emergency Bunker , run by Lieutenant Miguel Salazar .
Five years later , High Rock Emergency Bunker has lost contact with the other camps and with headquarters .
Zoe and her friend Elyse serve as the camp doctors , treating illnesses and using rotter blood samples to create a cure for the rotters , although Miguel believes a cure is impossible .
Miguel , at Zoe 's urging , sends Zoe , Elyse , his brother ( Zoe 's boyfriend )
Baca , Frank , Lucy , Derek , and Thomas on a supply run to retrieve medication from Whittendale University for Lily , a little girl suffering bacterial pneumonia .
While taking medication from a professor 's office , Zoe encounters Max , now partially a rotter .
Horrified , Zoe flees and accidentally attracts the attention of other rotters .
The group saves her , but Frank is infected and is killed .
Zoe successfully administers the medicine to Lily ; however Max has managed to enter the camp .
Due to Frank 's death , animosity between Zoe and Miguel increases .
While walking on her own , Zoe is attacked by Max , but signals for help and is rescued by Miguel , Baca , Thomas , Lucy , and Derek .
Realizing that Max is not fully a rotter , Zoe convinces Miguel to allow her to use Max 's blood to create a vaccine , and Miguel gives her 48 hours to create it , having been convinced by Frank 's wife Elle .
Zoe and Elyse realize they need to test Max 's blood on blood samples from live rotters .
She convinces Baca to help her by opening the gates to allow one rotter in and take a blood sample from it .
Although this initially goes well , rotters burst through the gates , kill Thomas , and infect Elyse .
Miguel kills several rotters and seals the doors to the compound , and , ignoring Zoe 's pleas that she can use the vaccine on her , kills Elyse .
Miguel tells Baca that earlier he saw Zoe 's name carved into Max 's arm .
When Baca confronts Zoe about this , she tells him about Max 's rape attempt .
Max steals the keys to his handcuffs from Alphonse during a scuffle .
Max begins to taunt Zoe , telling her repeatedly , " You are mine " , before freeing himself and attempting to rape her again .
However , he is fended off by Baca .
Lily 's mother , whom Max had previously infected , chases after Lily and kills Derek .
Max kills her and chases Lily to the motor pool .
The remaining military personnel arrive , but Max opens the doors and allows a horde of rotters inside , which kill Miguel , Elle , Lucy , and several others , although most of the rotters are killed .
Lily flees outside , and Zoe chases after her .
Max follows them into a greenhouse , where Zoe , hidden in mud , disembowels and decapitates him .
Zoe and Lily walk back into the compound , where she finds an infected Baca about to commit suicide .
Zoe convinces Baca she can cure him with the vaccine and injects him with it , curing him .
Sometime later , High Rock Emergency Bunker has been repaired , and Zoe sends a message to any remaining survivors that they have the vaccine , while the rotters ' growls are heard from within a nearby forest .
CAST * Johnathon Schaech as Max * Sophie Skelton as Zoe Parker * Marcus Vanco as Baca Salazar * Jeff Gum as Miguel Salazar * Mark Rhino Smith as Alphonse
* Cristina Serafini as Elle * Lillian Blankenship as Lily * Shari Watson as Elyse * Atanas Sreberev as Frank * Ulyana Chan as Lucy * Nathan Cooper as Savin * Vladimir Mihailov as Thomas PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On July 10 , 2013 it was announced that there would be a second remake of Day of the Dead , titled Day of the Dead :
Bloodline .
Christa Campbell and Lati Grobman , two of the producers behind Texas Chainsaw 3D , had obtained the rights .
Campbell , who had a small role in the first remake said , " We want to keep it as close to the Romero version as possible .
To make sure that his fans are happy .
These are not going to be zombies climbing walls and doing back flips like in World War Z.
" Campbell and Grobman held meetings with possible writers to figure out the best way to adapt the story .
It began filming in June 2016 .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film was originally planned to be released in 2017 , although it was later announced that the release date had been delayed until January 5 , 2018 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The film received overwhelmingly negative reviews .
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 0 % based on 6 reviews , and an average rating of 2.1/10 .
Michael Gingold of Rue Morgue called the idea of a remake " a foolish and pointless exercise " and said the film 's themes were " strictly and tediously standard - issue . "
Brian Tallerico on Rogerebert.com gave the film a star - and - a - half , stating there were a few well - choreographed action scenes , but " I was just watching people I did n't care about yell at each other and make really stupid decisions . "
Matt Donato of We Got
This Covered gave the film 1.5 stars out of 5 and stated , " Day Of The Dead : Bloodline somehow dethrones 2008 's earlier remake attempt as an even more forgettable ' reimagining ' ( aka rip - off ) .
" REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS