LEAVE NO TRACE ( FILM )
Leave No Trace is a 2018 American drama film directed by Debra Granik and written by Granik and Anne Rosellini , based on the book My Abandonment by Peter Rock .
The plot follows a veteran father with PTSD ( Ben Foster ) who lives in the forest with his young daughter ( Thomasin McKenzie ) .
It premiered at the 2018 Sundance Film Festival , and was theatrically released by Bleecker Street in the United States , on June 29 , 2018 .
The film received universal critical acclaim , with praise for the performances of Foster and McKenzie , and , after Paddington 2 , it is the second - most reviewed film to hold an approval rating of 100 % on Rotten Tomatoes .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Will , an Iraq War veteran suffering from PTSD , lives with his 13-year - old daughter , Tom , in a public park inside Portland , Oregon .
They live in almost total isolation , only entering town for occasional food and supplies .
Will makes their money by selling his VA - issued painkillers to other veterans .
After Tom is accidentally spotted in the woods by a jogger , officers arrest them and place them into social services .
They are given food and a house on a Christmas tree farm in rural Oregon , on the condition that Will abides by the rules of the home owner and social services .
Will begrudgingly begins to work on the settlement packaging pine trees , while Tom interacts with local kids her age in a 4H club .
Will feels oppressed by others ' presence and tells Tom they are returning to the woods .
She follows reluctantly .
Will and Tom catch a ride north with a long - haul trucker , who lets them out , at Will 's direction , on the edge of trackless woods .
They bushwhack in a direction Will expects to lead to an unoccupied cabin , but cold and darkness force them to build a makeshift tent to survive the night .
The next day , they find an abandoned cabin and move in .
Will leaves to find food but does not return for some time .
Tom walks out to look for him , eventually finding him unconscious at the bottom of a hill , presumably from a slip and fall .
She gets help from some locals passing by , who take them back to their mobile home community .
One of them suggests taking Will to a hospital , but Tom , knowing that going to a hospital could mean going back into social services , refuses .
A local woman calls a friend of hers , a former Army medic ( and fellow PTSD sufferer ) , who gets Will on the road to recovery .
He also lends Will his own therapy dog to ease his mental adjustment to society .
Will and Tom stay in the community for some time while Will 's injuries heal .
Tom likes this new home , and hopes that she and her father can stay there permanently .
Will , however , continues to feel overwhelmed by social interaction and insists that they leave again .
Tom protests this , telling him " the same thing that 's wrong with you is n't wrong with me " .
When Will leaves anyway , Tom says that she can not go with him this time , and needs to try to live a normal life .
They tearfully hug and part ways .
CAST
* Ben Foster as Will , Tom 's father * Thomasin McKenzie as Tom , Will 's daughter
* Jeff Kober as Mr. Walters , a tree farm owner * Dale Dickey as Dale , the leader of the RV park
* Dana Millican as Jean Bauer , Tom 's social worker * Derek Dresher as Larry , a man whom Will exchanges medications for money with * Isaiah Stone as Isaiah , a person whom Tom befriends
PRODUCTION FILMING
Section::::Production .
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography took place during the spring of 2017 in Portland , Oregon .
Eagle Fern Park in Clackamas County was used for the main forest scenes .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film had its world premiere at the Sundance Film Festival on January 20 , 2018 .
Shortly after , Bleecker Street acquired U.S. distribution rights to the film .
It was released on June 29 , 2018 .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 100 % based on 199 reviews , and an average rating of 8.5/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Leave No Trace takes an effectively low - key approach to a potentially sensationalistic story — and further benefits from brilliant work by Ben Foster and Thomasin McKenzie .
" On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 88 out of 100 , based on 44 critics , indicating " universal acclaim " .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
!
scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Date of ceremony ! scope="col
" Category ! scope="col " Recipient(s ) and nominee(s ) ! scope="col " Result ! scope="col " class="unsortable
" !
scope="row " rowspan="2 " Gotham Awards !
scope="row " Detroit Film Critics Society !
scope="row " rowspan="2 " National Board of Review rowspan="2"January 8 , 2019 rowspan="2"Breakthrough Performance Thomasin McKenzieLos Angeles Film Critics Association
Best Director Debra GranikBest Actor Ben Foster Runner - up !
scope="row
" Critics ' Choice Movie Awards
Best Young Performer Thomasin McKenzie !
scope="row
" rowspan=3 Satellite Awards ! scope="row " rowspan="3 " Independent Spirit Awards !
rowspan="4 " scope="row
" San Diego Film Critics Society Best Picture
Leave
No
Trace
Breakthrough Artist Thomasin McKenzie
Best Director Debra Granik
SEE ALSO
* List of films with a 100 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes , a film review aggregator website REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS