ACKLEY BRIDGE ( SERIES 2 )
The second series of the British television drama series Ackley Bridge began broadcasting on 5 June 2018 on Channel 4 , and ended on 21 August 2018 .
The series follows the lives of the staff and pupils at the fictional multi - cultural academy school Ackley Bridge College , in the fictitious Yorkshire mill town of Ackley Bridge .
It consists of twelve sixty - minute episodes .
CAST
MAIN
RECURRING
GUEST EPISODES Section::::Episodes .
PRODUCTION AND CASTING Section::::Production and casting .
Production and filming on the series began in January 2018 in Halifax , West Yorkshire .
Filming also occurred in Bradford , West Yorkshire .
Former Girls Aloud singer Kimberley Walsh was cast as Steve 's ex - girlfriend , Claire Butterworth , who is the mother to their child , Zac .
Walsh said she enjoyed working with Joyner and Nicholls , calling her role " fun " and the show " fantastic [ ... ] with a brilliant cast . "
Walsh states that her role in the series is " quite different " to other roles she has portrayed , describing Claire as " sassy and strong " as she is determined " to get her claws back into Steve .
"
Walsh said she enjoyed working with Joyner and Nicholls , calling her role " fun " and the show " fantastic [ ... ] with a brilliant cast . "
Vicky Entwistle , who played Janice Battersby on Coronation Street , appears as Iqbal Paracha 's secret wife Sandra Turner and mother of two of Iqbal 's children .
Entwistle commented that she is " thrilled to be joining the very talented cast of Ackley Bridge and look forward to watching how everything unfolds " and she " had a great time filming with a wonderful bunch of people . "
Lin Blakley and Ted Robbins join the show as Mandy 's parents , " abusive " Ray , who is suffering from dementia , and Dianne , who " ca n't cope " with Ray .
In January 2018 , the show 's production company , The Forge , put out an open casting call for teenagers and adults to act as extras in the series .
REFERENCES