PHILIP MORRIS ( CIGARETTE )
Philip Morris is an American brand of cigarettes , currently owned and manufactured by Philip Morris USA in the United States and Philip Morris International elsewhere .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Philip Morris ' eponymous brand was first made in England , United Kingdom , and introduced to the United States as early as 1883 .
Philip Morris incorporated in New York in 1902 ; until 1929 , when the company purchased its first cigarette factory in Richmond , Virginia , their brands were made under license by Stephano Brothers of Philadelphia , Pennsylvania .
Philip Morris English Blend was introduced as a non - filter , regular - size ( 70 mm ) brand in 1933 by Philip Morris USA .
To advertise the brand , Philip Morris hired 3-foot , 11-inch tall bellboy Johnny Roventini as their pitchman ; through the 1950s on radio , television , and in print advertisements , Johnny would shout out the famous slogan : " Call for Philip Morris ! "
Also known as Johnny Philip Morris , Roventini essentially became a living trade mark .
The name of Philip Morris English Blend was changed to Philip Morris Special Blend in 1948 .
In the 1950s , the brand was the sponsor of C.B.S. television 's
I Love Lucy show ; when it was originally broadcast , the show 's credits would run over a package of Philip Morris cigarettes .
When " I Love Lucy " was packaged for syndication , images of Philip Morris were replaced with the now - familiar heart on satin seen in the end - credits , though the original images have been restored as an extra for the D.V.D. box - sets of the series .
Philip Morris was introduced in king - size ( 85 mm ) in 1953 , in filter , menthol filter and non - filter ; the latter was renamed Commanders in 1960 .
The brown packaging of Philip Morris was first changed in 1955 .
The filter varieties were relaunced in 1963 ( as Multifilter , featuring a charcoal filter ) and 1966 ( in Menthol ) ; uniquely , they were both sold in plastic boxes .
The non - filtered versions of Philip Morris are still made today by its parent company .
The brand is still made and sold by Altria in Argentina , the European Union , Japan , and Uruguay .
In Canada , Philip Morris was originally made by the Tuckett Tobacco Company , which had bought out Philip Morris ' Canadian subsidiary early in the twentieth century .
Tuckett itself was bought by Imperial Tobacco Canada in 1930 , although it continued manufacturing until 1966 , when Imperial shut down the Tuckett factory and took over its brands .
The last survivor in Canada of the Philip Morris brand , the king - sized , plain - end version , was discontinued in the early 1990s .
Nowadays the brand is the 15th best selling international brand and Philip Morris ' sixth largest international brand , with a volume of 36 billion cigarettes sold in 2016 , and the brand is sold in over 40 countries worldwide .
ADVERTISING Section::::Advertising .
In 1955 , Philip Morris sales were at their lowest point-
even I Love Lucy was n't selling them as fast as they wanted the public to smoke them
( that 's why they dropped their sponsorship of Lucy 's program that June ) .
They discovered they needed to change their advertising approach .
In Vance Packard " The Hidden Persuaders " ( 1957 ) , it was revealed that Philip Morris conducted a survey in mid-1955 to find out why people were n't buying them .
Participants were asked to complete this sentence : " When I think of Philip Morris , I think of _ _
_
_
_
_
_ _ _ _ .
" The majority of them answered , " irritation " .
This was because in previous advertising campaigns , Philip Morris stressed their brand was " entirely free of a source of irritation found in the manufacture of all other leading cigarettes"- and people remembered that even when they abandoned that claim after 1953 .
It was decided they would project a more " positive " approach- and a different pack replaced the brown one that had been used for at least 40 years .
They also " retired " Johnny Roventini , their famous " Call for Philip Morris ! "
bellhop [ who 'd been a part of their radio , print , and TV ad campaigns since 1933 ] .
By the end of 1955 , Philip Morris introduced a white pack with stripes and a new logo , and stressed the word " gentleness " in their advertising .
It worked : according to Packard , first - quarter sales in 1956 were up 26 % over the previous year .
And Philip Morris continued to use this approach , emphasizing " young smokers " , " mildness " and a preference for cigarettes " without filters " towards the end of the 1950s ( Liggett & Myers also stressed " If you like a mild smoke , but you do n't like filters , join the ' Chesterfield People'---get Chesterfield King ! "
in their 1965 ad campaign ) .
By 1958 , however , they revived " old memories " of Johnny , " Call for Philip Morris ! " , and " On the Trail " ( from Ferde Grofé 's Grand Canyon Suite , used as their musical signature on radio and TV for 22 years ) in their advertisings .
Veteran actor / announcer Michael Rye was the announcer heard in the 1959 ads .
In 1960 , they altered their " King Size " brand into " Philip Morris Commander " .
Again , they " rewrapped " the pack a bit , and stressed a " nautical " theme in their advertising .
Douglas Edwards and the News , CBS ' early evening 15 minute newscast [ 7pm(et ) in most areas , with a 7:15pm " feed " in others ] , was sponsored on alternate evenings by Philip Morris , who continued to be a regular sponsor after Walter Cronkite succeeded Douglas Edwards in April 1962 .
Over the years , Philip Morris USA made many poster and television ads to promote the Philip Morris and Commander brand , starting from 1933 and ending in 1966 , when the brand started to lose appeal .
A special thermometer depicting Marlboro at the top and Philip Morris at the bottom , as well as a Philip Morris Commander lighter were also made .
MARKETS Section::::Markets .
Philip Morris was or still is sold in the following countries :
Canada , United States , Mexico , Chile , Uruguay , Argentina , Luxembourg , Netherlands , West Germany , Germany , Sweden , Finland , France , Switzerland , Austria , Portugal , Spain , Italy , Hungary , Czech Republic , Slovakia , Croatia , Greece , Cyprus , Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania , Ukraine , Russia , Georgia , Philippines , Hong Kong , Japan and Australia .
IN ITALY Section::::In Italy .
In June 2015 , the brand changed its name and look from Diana to Philip Morris .
SEE ALSO * Cigarette * Tobacco smoking REFERENCES