STATION 19
Station 19 is an American action - drama television series created by Stacy McKee for ABC .
McKee , Shonda Rhimes , Betsy Beers , and Paris Barclay serve as executive producers on the series , which is the second spin - off to Grey 's Anatomy .
Set in Seattle , the series focuses on the lives of the men and women at Seattle Fire Station 19 .
The series is produced by Shondaland and ABC Studios , with McKee serving as showrunner .
The series stars Jaina Lee Ortiz , Jason George , Grey Damon , Barrett Doss , Alberto Frezza , Jay Hayden , Okieriete Onaodowan , Danielle Savre , and Miguel Sandoval .
In May 2017 , the spin - off received a series order from ABC .
Ortiz was cast in July 2017 , and the cast was filled out by October .
Filming for the series takes place primarily in Los Angeles .
The first season , consisting of ten episodes , originally aired from March 22 to May 17 , 2018 .
In May 2018 , ABC renewed the series for a second season , which premiered on October 4 , 2018 .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
The series follows a group of heroic firefighters of the Seattle Fire Department at Station 19 from the captain down the ranks to the newest recruit in their personal and professional lives .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* Jaina Lee Ortiz as Andrea
" Andy " Herrera : A confident Lieutenant at Station 19 and the daughter of Captain Pruitt Herrera .
She was a Co - Acting Captain of Station 19 .
* Jason George as Ben Warren : A firefighter at Station 19 and a former anesthesiologist - turned - surgical - resident at Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital .
He is married to Miranda Bailey .
* Grey Damon as Jack Gibson : Lieutenant at Station 19 .
He is passionate , energetic , and fearless .
He was one of Station 19 's Co - Acting Captains , along with Herrera * Barrett Doss as Victoria " Vic " Hughes : A younger firefighter at Station 19 .
* Alberto Frezza as Ryan Tanner : A police officer at Seattle PD .
He and Andy are longtime friends and had a romantic relationship in high school .
* Jay Hayden as Travis Montgomery : A firefighter and the heart of Station 19 .
* Okieriete Onaodowan as Dean Miller : A charismatic firefighter at Station 19 .
* Danielle Savre as Maya Bishop : A bisexual firefighter at Station 19 and a former Olympic athlete who is also Andy 's best friend .
* Miguel Sandoval as Pruitt Herrera : Captain at Station 19 and a mentor to Andy and Jack .
He steps down from his role in the series premiere .
* Boris Kodjoe as Robert Sullivan ( season 2 ) :
Prior to being Captain he was the General at the Academy where Miller and Gibson were training .
The new Captain at Station 19.In
the second season we learn that he was once best friends with Chief Ripley .
RECURRING
* Marla Gibbs as Edith , a feisty retirement home retiree who sets up Travis with her grandson , Grant * Brett Tucker as Fire Chief Lucas Ripley , the Fire Chief for Seattle Fire Department * Brenda Song as JJ , a music reviewer who Dean saves from a fire and later begins to date
* Leslie Hope as Battalion Chief Frankel , the battalion chief for Seattle Fire Department * Sterling Sulieman as Grant , the sous chef grandson of Edith who she sets up with
Travis NOTABLE GUESTS
* Chandra Wilson as Miranda Bailey : Chief of Surgery at Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital and Ben Warren 's wife .
* Ellen Pompeo as Meredith Grey : Chief of General Surgery at Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital .
* Jake Borelli as Levi Schmitt : A new intern at Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital .
* BJ Tanner as Tuck Jones : Warren 's stepson .
* Jee Young Han as Charlotte Dearborn : The Fire Lieutenant of Station 12 , who competes against Herrera and Gibson for Captain .
* Giacomo Gianniotti as Andrew DeLuca ( season 2 ) :
A surgical resident at Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital .
* Kelly McCreary as Maggie Pierce ( season 2 ) : Chief of Cardiothoracic Surgery at Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital . EPISODES BACKDOOR PILOT ( 2018 )
Section::::Episodes .
Section::::Backdoor pilot ( 2018 ) .
For the backdoor pilot , " No . overall " and " No . in season " refer to the episode 's place in the order of episodes of the parent series Grey 's Anatomy .
SEASON 1
( 2018 )
SEASON 2 ( 2018 )
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
On May 16 , 2017 , ABC chief Channing Dungey announced at ABC 's upfront presentation that the network had given a straight - to - series order for a second Grey 's Anatomy spin - off .
Stacy McKee , a long - term Grey 's writer and executive producer , will serve as showrunner and executive producer , with Shonda Rhimes and Betsy Beers also serving as executive producers .
The series , which would be set in a Seattle firehouse , would follow the lives of a group of firefighters .
The order consisted of 10 episodes .
When announcing the series , Dungey said , " No one can interweave the jeopardy firefighters face in the line of duty with the drama in their personal lives quite like Shonda , and Grey 's signature Seattle setting is the perfect backdrop for this exciting spinoff . "
Patrick Moran , president at ABC Studios , added that " We talked [ with Shonda ] about the elements of Grey 's Anatomy that seem to resonate with the audience — emotional storytelling , deep human connection , a high - stakes environment and strong and empowered women — and those elements will carry over to the spinoff . "
In July 2017 , Paris Barclay signed on to the series as producing director and executive producer .
In January 2018 , it was announced that Ellen Pompeo had renewed her contract to portray Meredith Grey through season 16 of Grey 's , in addition to becoming a producer on the show and a co - executive producer on the spin - off .
Later that month , ABC announced that the series would be titled Station 19 .
An episode of Grey 's Anatomy , originally planned to air in fall 2017 but instead set to air in March 2018 , will serve as a backdoor pilot for the series .
The backdoor pilot episode will feature the introduction of the lead character of the spin - off , Andy Herrera , " as a story within the episode " and " showcase a really lovely story for Ben , where we get to just juxtapose his two worlds and see his reaction as he transitions from one world to the next " .
On May 11 , 2018 , ABC renewed the series for a second season .
The second season is scheduled to premiere on October 4 , 2018 .
On October 19 , 2018 , it was announced that ABC had ordered a full season for the second season .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
On July 26 , 2017 , Jaina Lee Ortiz was cast as the female lead .
In September 2017 , it was announced that Jason George , who has played Dr. Ben Warren since season 6 of Grey 's Anatomy , would be leaving the series to join the spin - off as a series regular .
He is expected to continue to be a series regular on Grey 's until production on the spin - off begins .
On October 6 , Grey Damon was cast as Lieutenant Jack , Jay Hayden as Travis , Okieriete Onaodowan as Dean , Danielle Savre as Maya , and Barrett Doss as Victoria .
They were shortly followed by Miguel Sandoval as Captain Pruitt , and Alberto Frezza as police officer Ryan .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Filming for the first season began on October 18 , 2017 , and concluded on April 2 , 2018 .
Filming for the series takes place primarily in Los Angeles ; additional filming for the series takes place in Seattle .
The station in Station 19 is based on Seattle 's Station 20 , located in its Queen Anne neighborhood .
RELEASE
BROADCAST Section::::Release .
Section::::Broadcast .
Station 19 began airing on March 22 , 2018 , on ABC in the United States .
CTV acquired the broadcast rights for Canada .
Sky Living acquired the rights for to air the series in the UK & Ireland .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
In early December 2017 , Entertainment Weekly released first look images of the series .
RECEPTION RATINGS
SEASON 1 SEASON 2 CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 67 % approval rating with an average rating of 6.14/10 based on 15 reviews .
Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned a score of 55 out of 100 based on 10 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Nominee(s ) !
Result ! scope="col " class="unsortable " REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS