UNCLE DREW
Uncle Drew is a 2018 American sports comedy film directed by Charles Stone III and written by Jay Longino .
It stars Kyrie Irving as the title character from his Pepsi Max advertisements that began airing in 2012 , along with former NBA players Shaquille O'Neal , Chris Webber , Reggie Miller , and Nate Robinson , as well as former WNBA player Lisa Leslie .
Lil Rel Howery , Erica Ash , J. B. Smoove , Mike Epps , Tiffany Haddish , and Nick Kroll also star .
The film was released in the United States by Lionsgate on June 29 , 2018 and received mixed reviews from critics , who praised the performances of the cast , but called the direction and screenplay " formulaic " .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The film opens with a documentary - style overview of Uncle Drew , a well - remembered basketball legend who was supposed to play in the Rucker Classic .
However , due to an unknown conflict , he and his team disappeared .
In the present , Dax is the underappreciated coach of the Harlem Money and their star player , Casper Jones .
Dax spends lavishly to keep both his girlfriend , Jess , and Casper happy , despite being a clerk at Foot Locker .
During practice Mookie , an old rival of Dax 's , arrives and taunts him about the upcoming Rucker Classic tournament .
In a dream sequence , we learn that Dax was an orphan who planned on becoming a basketball player , but was humiliated by Mookie after he had a shot blocked by him in their youth .
The next day at work Casper demands expensive new shoes from Dax , who effectively bankrupts himself purchasing them .
Despite this , Mookie successfully recruits Casper and the rest of Dax 's team away from him , leading to a confrontation involving Dax forcibly trying to remove Casper 's shoes that is filmed and shown on ESPN .
Due to this humiliation , Dax 's girlfriend Jess dumps him and kicks him out of her apartment .
Dejected , Dax has little luck finding players for a new team until the cantankerous Angelo encourages him to seek out Uncle Drew .
Drew turns out to be an exceptional basketball player despite his old age .
After seeing a demonstration of Drew 's prowess , Dax recruits him for the team , neglecting to inform him about the tournament 's prize money .
Drew agrees to join Dax under the condition that they recruit his original teammates .
They set off in Drew 's van and recruit Preacher , who has since become an actual preacher , but incur the wrath of his wife Betty Lou who pursues them as they leave town .
They next reunite with the partially blind Lights and the wheelchair bound Boots whose granddaughter , Maya , volunteers at the nursing home looking after them .
They escape and make it to the karate dojo of Big Fella .
Big Fella is reluctant to join the team , as he still holds a grudge against Drew , but Dax persuades him to join .
After his credit card is declined at a gas station , Dax attempts to hustle the coach of a youth girls basketball team to earn money for fuel .
Dax 's team loses , but Drew offers up the money to help Dax after learning the real motive for the game , and Maya begins to appreciate him for the way he treats the elders .
Returning to Rucker Park , Drew gives each member of his team gear that restores their faith and abilities , but Big Fella still refuses to cooperate with Drew .
During the team 's first game in the tournament Big Fella and Drew tussle on the court , almost costing them the win .
Eventually , Drew acknowledges his mistake : sleeping with Big Fella 's now deceased wife before the big game .
He admits that he too loved her and the two make amends .
Meanwhile , Dax learns that Mookie and Jess are dating , but begins falling for Maya instead .
After learning about the tournament 's prize money from Angelo and realizing he was misled , Drew angrily confronts Dax .
Dax confides in him about his past with Mookie , causing Drew to forgive him .
While playing in the semi - finals , Big Fella suddenly has a heart attack and is taken to the hospital .
Betty Lou arrives but instead of chastising Preacher , she agrees to fill in as the team 's fifth member .
Dax and his team , now renamed the Harlem Buckets , play against Mookie 's team in the finals who are an even match for them .
Late in the game Lights and Casper collide and are both injured , forcing Dax and Mookie to fill in .
Dax still lacks self - confidence , but his teammates give him the advice he needs and he manages to make the game - winning shot , beating Mookie and earning everyone 's respect .
Returning to the hospital the team reunite with Big Fella , Dax uses the prize money to pay his medical bills , and ESPN now hails Dax as a hero .
During the credits Jess is shown trying to call Dax about getting back together , becoming increasingly distraught when he does not answer .
CAST * Kyrie Irving as Uncle Drew , a streetball legend .
*
Lil Rel Howery as Dax Winslow , a streetball team manager .
* Ashton Tyler as Young Dax
* Shaquille O'Neal as Big Fella , Uncle Drew 's former teammate who now runs a martial arts dojo .
* Chris Webber as Preacher , Uncle Drew 's former teammate who is now a church minister .
* Reggie Miller as Wilbur " Lights " Wallace , Uncle Drew 's former teammate who is legally blind .
* Nate Robinson as Boots , Uncle Drew 's former teammate who has selective mutism and appears to be a paraplegic .
* Lisa Leslie as Betty Lou , Preacher 's wife .
* Erica Ash as Maya , Boots ' granddaughter and Dax 's love interest .
* J.B. Smoove as Angelo , a Harlem resident who remembers Uncle Drew .
* Mike Epps as Louis , a Harlem resident who is Angelo 's friend .
* Tiffany Haddish as Jess , Dax 's materialistic ex - girlfriend and Mookie 's girlfriend .
* Nick Kroll as Mookie Bass , Dax 's longtime rival .
* Aaron Gordon as Casper Jones , a streetball player Mookie steals from Dax .
* Wesley Witherspoon as Mario , a streetball player Mookie steals from Dax .
Section::::Cast .
Making cameo appearances as themselves are Sal Masekela , John Calipari , Jon Hammond , Scoop Jackson , Pee Wee Kirkland , Earl Monroe , Chris Mullin , Bill Walton , George Gervin , Steve Nash , David Robinson , Jerry West , Dikembe Mutombo , NeNe Leakes , Rick Barry , Rick Ross , Scott Van Pelt and Ben Nethongkome .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On February 16 , 2017 , PepsiCo announced that they would partner with Temple Hill Entertainment for the production of the film , featuring the character Uncle Drew from the Pepsi Max advertisements .
On September 5 , 2017 , ESPN 's SportsCenter revealed the cast .
Lil Rel Howery stated that Kyrie Irving heard about his trade from the Cleveland Cavaliers to the Boston Celtics while filming .
RELEASE Section::::Release .
On February 12 , 2018 , Kyrie Irving announced the release date of June 29 , 2018 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Uncle Drew has grossed $ 42.5 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 1.9 million in other territories , for a total worldwide gross of $ 44.3 million .
In the United States and Canada , Uncle Drew was released alongside , and was projected to gross $ 11–15 million from 2,742 theaters in its opening weekend .
It made $ 6.1 million on its first day , including $ 1.1 million from Thursday night previews .
It went on to debut to $ 15.5 million , finishing fourth at the box office , behind , Incredibles 2 , and Sicario :
Day of the Soldado .
It fell 56 % in its second weekend , to $ 6.7 million , finishing sixth .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 62 % based on 84 reviews , and an average rating of 5.9/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Kyrie Irving 's crossover to comedy is amiable enough to score with basketball fans , but Uncle Drew is held back by formulaic direction and too much product placement . "
On Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating to reviews , the film has a weighted average score of 57 out of 100 , based on reviews from 27 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews .
"
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A " on an A+ to F scale .
David Ehrlich of IndieWire gave the film a " B – " and wrote : " At heart , Uncle Drew is a personality - driven film .
The plot is spare , and the storytelling gets super janky whenever screenwriter Jay Longino is asked to manufacture a new obstacle .
But as wince - inducing as it can be to watch the film stall for time , or use the Rucker prize money to muster up some hollow conflict , the climactic streetball showdown pays off . "
Varietys Peter Debtuge praised the performances of the NBA players and makeup , while saying the film is never that surprising or funny , writing , " While it wo n't increase your appetite for zero - calorie sugar water one bit ( oddly enough , Nike gets far more prominent on - screen placement ) , this affectionate basketball - themed comedy from sports - savvy director Charles Stone III comes across as an effective feature - length ad for the game itself . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Recipients !
Result !
Reference REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS