ADRIFT ( 2018 FILM )
Adrift is a 2018 American romantic drama film produced and directed by Baltasar Kormákur , and written by David Branson Smith , Aaron Kandell and Jordan Kandell .
Based on a true story and set in 1983 , the film stars Shailene Woodley and Sam Claflin as a couple who are stranded in the middle of the Pacific Ocean after a hurricane , and must find their way to Hawaii with a damaged boat and no radio .
Adrift was released in the United States on June 1 , 2018 by STXfilms and received mixed reviews from critics , who praised Woodley 's performance and the cinematography but criticized the familiar narrative .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The film begins with Tami awakening on the sailing yacht Hazaña after being unconscious for some time .
After regaining her memory that Richard did not come below with her , she searches the crippled yacht in hopes of finding her fiancé Richard and soon realizes he has been swept overboard after his safety harness broke during the hurricane .
Tami screams in anguish and it is revealed that Tami is all alone , with no ships or land in sight .
Back to 1983 ( five months before the catastrophic hurricane ) , Tami arrives in Tahiti on board the schooner Sofia and meets Richard Sharp , a British sailor .
Richard then invites Tami for dinner onboard his boat , named Mayaluga .
During a conversation , while having dinner together , Richard reveals that he experiences hallucinations while at sea .
Back in real - time , Tami is stranded on board a crippled Hazaña and finds out that all the electronic devices are ruined by water damage , preventing her from making distress calls .
Tami spots the lost dinghy with Richard clinging onto it and tries to sail the ship towards Richard but to no avail .
After falling off the yacht and almost drowning , Tami has no choice but to make repairs to the ship in order to get it moving .
She makes a makeshift sail using a broken pole and a storm jib ( a triangular sail ) .
She also uses a pump to prevent the cabin from flooding and then makes her way towards Richard .
After successfully saving Richard , Tami realizes that Richard has broken ribs and a shattered right shin .
While searching for food supplies , Tami realizes that she has a severe head injury and stitches the wound with a sail needle and thread .
Back in 1983 ( shortly before embarking on the ill - fated trip ) , Tami and Richard bump into Peter and Christine Crompton , owners of the Hazaña , a luxury
Trintella 44 yacht .
The Cromptons offer Richard $ 10,000 and a return first class ticket back to Tahiti to help them sail Hazaña to San Diego , California after a family emergency in London .
Richard accepts the offer , with a condition that Tami comes along .
Tami later explains to Richard that she is n't ready to return home yet but changes her mind .
Richard proposes to Tami with a handmade ring , which Tami accepts .
Back in real - time , Tami finds out they are off - course and decides to change course to Hawaii .
Tami awakens and sees a tanker heading straight for the Hazaña .
She fires multiple flares but the ship sails right past them and disappears after .
Tami realises she has been hallucinating .
Richard begins to suffer from high fever but reminds Tami that the sky was red in the morning , which signifies a storm approaching .
Tami prepares Richard and herself for the storm by creating a makeshift shelter .
Cutting back to shortly before the hurricane struck , Tami and Richard receive news of the impending Hurricane Raymond but decide to continue to San Diego , with a slight diversion northward to attempt to avoid the central area of the hurricane , which has the highest winds and the roughest seas .
Tami tries to radio for help but to no avail .
The storm alters course unexpectectedly and the yacht then enters the eye of the storm .
The ship struggles to stay afloat , the mainsail tears and the after boom breaks .
Richard and Tami have no choice but to lower the sails to prevent the yacht from tipping over due to strong winds .
While returning to the cockpit , Tami almost falls off the yacht after the ship hit turbulent waves .
Richard professes his love for Tami and demands that she go below where she would be safer .
Hazaña is flipped multiple times after encountering a rogue wave .
Tami is thrown about in the cabin , thus suffering her severe head injury , and Richard is thrown overboard after he is knocked unconscious by the mast and his safety harness breaks .
Richard slowly sinks into the depths of the ocean , while the Hazaña continues to flip multiple times and floats back to the surface thereafter .
Back in real - time , Tami realizes that her perception of the injured Richard is nothing but a hallucination and surrenders to the reality that Richard has been lost at sea .
Tami then sees islands in a distance and uses her binoculars to see better .
She sees a Japanese research vessel in a distance and fires two flares in its direction .
The research vessel then alters its course and heads towards Tami , rescuing her .
Tami returns to Tahiti after recovering from her head injury and visits Richard 's boat ( the Mayaluga ) and bursts into tears after seeing the wall of photos of Richard and her .
Tami then goes to the beach with a frangipani flower and places her engagement ring from Richard around the flower and lets it go in the water .
It is then revealed in the credits that Richard Sharp was swept overboard and was never found , Tami Oldham was all alone aboard the Hazaña for 41 days and that she continues to sail to date .
CAST * Shailene Woodley as Tami Oldham
* Sam Claflin as Richard Sharp * Jeffrey Thomas as Peter Crompton * Elizabeth Hawthorne as Christine Crompton * Grace Palmer as Deb PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Adrift was acquired by STX Entertainment in February 2017 .
The studio was set to produce and distribute the film , starring Shailene Woodley as Tami Oldham , and directed by Baltasar Kormákur from a script by Aaron & Jordan Kandell .
The Kandells and Woodley also produced the film , along with Kormákur through his RVK Studios , and Ralph Winter .
In April 2017 , Miles Teller entered into negotiations to co - star opposite Woodley , whom he had collaborated with four times prior .
However , in May 2017 , Sam Claflin joined the film in the role meant for Teller , who had to pass due to " scheduling conflicts . "
Principal photography on the film began in July 2017 in Fiji , and lasted five weeks .
The cast and crew took two - hour boat rides into the ocean every day , and Woodley stated many members were seasick over the course of filming .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
" Where 's My Love " by SYML was featured in the first trailer for Adrift , which was released on March 14 , 2018 . "
Song For Zula " by Phosphorescent was featured in the final trailer , released on May 7 , 2018 .
Academy Award - nominated composer Hauschka composed the original score for the film .
The film 's soundtrack includes his original score , and a cover of Tom Waits 's " I Hope That I Do n't Fall In Love With You " , by Emilíana Torrini .
Also featured in the film but not on the soundtrack is " Picture In A Frame " by Waits , which is played during a montage scene of Tami Oldham Ashcraft before the end credits .
The soundtrack has been released by Sony Classical and is available on Apple Music , Spotify , and Amazon Music .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Adrift was released on June 1 , 2018 in the United States by STX Entertainment .
The film 's $ 35 million production was mostly covered by foreign presales , totalling up to $ 20 million .
STX accounted for $ 3 million out of the film 's remaining $ 15 million budget ( co - financed by Lakeshore Entertainment , Huayi Brothers , Ingenious ) , with an additional $ 25 million spent on promotion and advertisement .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
Adrift grossed $ 31.4 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 28.5 million in other territories , for a total gross of $ 59.9 million , against a production budget of $ 35 million .
In the United States and Canada , Adrift was released alongside Action Point and Upgrade , and was projected to gross $ 10–15 million from 3,015 theaters in its opening weekend .
The film made $ 4.2 million on its first day , including $ 725,000 from Thursday night previews .
It went on to debut to $ 11.6 million , finishing third , behind and Deadpool 2 ; 62 % of its audience was female , with 69 % being over the age of 25 .
The film fell 55 % to $ 5.3 million in its second week , finishing sixth .
HOME ENTERTAINMENT Section::::Home Entertainment .
Adrift was released by Universal Pictures Home Entertainment , in collaboration with STXfilms , on Digital HD on August 21 , 2018 and DVD and Blu - ray on September 4 , 2018 .
Special features include deleted scenes , 3 featurettes , theatrical trailers as well as a feature commentary by director Baltasar Kormákur and leading actress and producer Shailene Woodley .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 71 % based on 164 reviews , and an average rating of 6.2/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Adrift sails smoothly between love story and survival drama , thanks in large part to a gripping central performance from Shailene Woodley .
"
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 56 out of 100 , based on 29 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews .
"
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B " on an A+ to F scale .
David Ehrlich of IndieWire gave the film a " B – " and praised Woodley 's performance , saying : " When all else fails , which it sometimes does , Woodley is there to right the ship .
She 's eminently believable as a whip - smart , hyper - capable , iron - willed human being who still finds a way to doubt herself ...
At its best , she wills Adrift into a moving story about a natural born wanderer who needs an anchor to know her own strength .
"
Varietys Owen Gleiberman also noted the film 's flaws while praising Woodley , writing , " For long passages of Adrift , we 're pleasantly engrossed without necessarily being riveted .
The courtship , heartfelt as it is , has a glorified YA shimmer ; the boat - adrift - at - sea sections are like All Is Lost without the ingenuity .
But there 's a hook , a surprise , a twist that carries you through . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Year !
Association !
Category !
Recipient(s ) !
Result ! class="unsortable
" Ref .
SEE ALSO * All Is Lost , a similarly themed 2013 movie .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS