DEEP BLUE SEA 2
Deep Blue Sea 2 is a 2018 American science fiction horror film directed by Darin Scott .
It is a stand - alone sequel to the 1999 film Deep Blue Sea , and stars Danielle Savre , Michael Beach , and Rob Mayes .
The film was released direct - to - video on April 17 , 2018 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Shark conservationist Misty Calhoun is invited to visit the sea - based facility Akhelios by pharmaceutical billionaire Carl Durant .
She and neurobiology students Leslie and Daniel Kim are taken to the facility by Durant 's associate Craig Burns on a motorboat .
When they arrive , they meet Durant , as well as the facility 's crew , which include shark trainers Trent Slater , Mike Shutello , and Josh Hooper , and computer technician Aaron Ellroy .
As a demonstration , Durant throws Aaron into the water , letting the sharks chase him : at the last possible second , he uses a key to drive them away in formation .
Durant explains that he has been genetically altering the brains of five bull sharks to make them smarter , which enrages Misty .
The group subsequently convenes in the wet lab , where Durant explains to Misty that the reason he invited her is because the alpha shark , Bella , has been acting strangely , to which Misty concludes is because she is pregnant .
Durant is puzzled by this for her pregnancy did not come up on any tests they ran on her , and Misty theorizes that their genetic alterations hid this .
Durant then brings Bella into the wet lab , and has Josh take samples of her saliva , although Bella attempts to bite his arm ; he narrowly avoids this .
Meanwhile , on the surface , a second shark pushes the motorboat into an electric control box , causing it to explode , and creating significant damage on the surface .
The sharks then begin flooding the facility and Craig is eaten while the others remain in the wet lab .
Misty then realizes that Bella went into labor after being dropped back into the pool , and has given birth to a series of shark pups , which attacked Craig .
Mike attempts to swim to the surface , but one of the sharks knocks him unconscious ; Trent rescues him and Misty manages to revive him .
As he leans over the pool to taunt the sharks , one of them kills him .
As a result of a lack of pressure stabilization in the room , the water from the pool pours in , and the group becomes separated ; Leslie is knocked unconscious in the flooding ; Durant and Daniel both end up alone .
Misty and Trent become stranded together , as do Aaron and Josh .
Trent reveals to Misty that Durant has been doing the same experiments on himself using a genetics - altering liquid in order to make himself more intelligent , due to his phobia that technology will one day rule the world .
Durant reunites with Misty and Trent soon after , and they make their way to an air ventilation shaft that will lead to the surface .
Aaron and Josh arrive in one of the sleeping quarters , but the shark pups find them , and eat Josh while Aaron escapes on an air mattress .
Misty , Trent , and Durant arrive at the shaft ; Durant locks her out of the room after she attempts to find other survivors , which enrages Trent .
The two manage to reach the surface .
Meanwhile , Daniel finds Leslie behind a door , and the shark pups eat her in front of him .
He is soon found by Aaron , who was attacked by the pups and lost the mattress , and they attempt to find a way to the surface .
Misty , meanwhile , uses a blow torch to get inside the room with the ventilation shaft , and is met by Aaron and Daniel .
The shark pups then find them , and Misty distracts them while Aaron and Daniel begin climbing to the surface .
The water rises as they climb to the surface , which allows the pups to reach Daniel and bisect him while Aaron reaches the surface .
Meanwhile , Misty , using scuba gear she found in Trent 's quarters , manages to swim to the surface and reunite with the others .
Realizing that the facility is sinking , and they can not stay any longer , the group makes a break for the motorboat .
Aaron is dragged underwater by one of the sharks while Durant is confronted by Bella , and seemingly scares her away .
However , moments later , Bella jumps up and eats him , while Misty and Trent reach the motorboat and use two flare guns to kill one of the sharks .
Aaron then jumps onto the boat , explaining that he escaped one of the sharks .
Misty tells Trent that they can not let the sharks roam in the open ocean , and Trent blows up the facility with a self - destruct button .
Misty , Trent , and Aaron then escape on the motorboat .
However , it is soon revealed that Bella and her pups survived the explosion and are now free in the open ocean .
CAST * Danielle Savre as Dr. Misty Calhoun , a shark conservationist * Rob Mayes as Trent Slater , a highly decorated ex - Navy SEAL * Michael Beach as Carl Durant , a big pharmaceutical billionaire with questionable ethics
* Nathan Lynn as Aaron Ellroy , a tech expert * Kim Syster as Leslie Kim , a neurobiologist student * Jeremy Jess Boado as Daniel Kim , a clinical neurophysiologist student * Darron Meyer as Craig Burns * Adrian Collins as Mike Shutello
* Cameron Robertson as Josh Hooper PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In 2008 , Warner Premiere was planning a direct - to - video sequel to Renny Harlin 's Deep Blue Sea , which would be directed by Jack Perez and released sometime in 2009 .
The project , though , did not materialize .
Even so , in June 2017 , it was announced that the sequel directed by Darin Scott had begun filming in Cape Town , South Africa .
In January 2018 , Warner Bros. Home Entertainment released a trailer for Deep Blue Sea 2 .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
On April 17 , 2018 , Deep Blue Sea 2 was released on Blu - ray combo pack , DVD and Digital HD , the first two of which contain two featurettes—"Returning to the Deep – The Making of Deep Blue Sea 2 " and " Deep Blue Sea 2 : Death by Shark"—gag reel , and deleted scenes .
The direct - to - video release Deep Blue Sea 2 debuted at # 8 on the Top 20 Sellers for the week ended 04 - 21 - 18 alongside two theatrical new releases ;
Tom Hank starrer The Post ( # 4 debut ) and Liam Neeson starrer
The Commuter ( # 3 debut . )
Deep Blue Sea 2 achieved an Index of 12.56 versus 28.71 for The Post and 36.83 for The Commuter .
Blu - ray disc accounted for 35 % of the sales for Deep Blue Sea 2 versus 48 % for The Post and 50 % for The Commuter .
The Deep Blue Sea 2 home video debut Ranking and Index was approximately on - par with the home video debut of theatrical release Insidious :
The Last Key two weeks earlier .
While it remained in the top 20 Sellers in its second week of release ( the week ended 04 - 28 - 18 , )
Deep Blue Sea 2 dropped ten places in its second week , a drop approximately in line with The Post which dropped seven places in its second week .
Deep Blue Sea 2 also released the same week on VOD .
It debuted at # 10 on the Microsoft Store VOD chart for the week ended 04 - 23 - 18 just behind theatrical release Insidious :
The Last Key and maintained its position at # 10 the following week ( for the week ended 04 - 30 - 18 ) just behind theatrical release , Matt Damon starrer Downsizing .
The Deep Blue Sea 2 VOD debut ranking was approximately on - par with the VOD debut of theatrical release Winchester the following week .
Deep Blue Sea 2 was the only non - theatrical release to appear in the top 10 of any VOD chart for the months of April and May 2018 .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS Section::::External links .