THE PUNISHER ( SEASON 2 )
The second season of the American web television series The Punisher , which is based on the Marvel Comics character of the same name , revolves around Frank Castle ruthlessly hunting down criminals .
It is set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe ( MCU ) , sharing continuity with the films and other television series of the franchise .
The season is produced by Marvel Television in association with ABC Studios and Bohemian Risk Productions , with Steven Lightfoot serving as showrunner .
Jon Bernthal stars as Frank Castle , with principal cast members Ben Barnes , Amber Rose Revah , and
Jason R. Moore also returning from the first season .
They are joined by Josh Stewart , Floriana Lima , Giorgia Whigham , Corbin Bernsen , and Annette O'Toole .
A second season of The Punisher was ordered in December 2017 , a month after the first season was released .
The new cast members were added in February 2018 .
Filming began in New York City the next month and wrapped in August .
The 13-episode season is expected to be released in January 2019 .
CAST AND CHARACTERS
* Jon Bernthal as Frank Castle / Punisher * Ben Barnes as Billy Russo * Amber Rose Revah as Dinah Madani
* Jason R. Moore as Curtis Hoyle * Josh Stewart as John Pilgrim * Floriana Lima as Krista Dumont
* Giorgia Whigham as Amy Bendix * Corbin Bernsen as Anderson Schultz
* Annette O'Toole as Eliza Schultz PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
A second season of The Punisher was ordered by Netflix in December 2017 , less than a month after the first season was released .
Showrunner Steve Lightfoot had an idea of what a second season would be when he first knew what the " journey of Season 1 " was at the start of his work on the series , and did not let the fan reaction to the first season affect his plans since " some people love it , some people hate it , some people are in the middle .
My personal opinion with that stuff is you just have to be true to the character and the story you choose to tell .
" The season consists of 13 episodes .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Stars returning for the season were confirmed in February 2018 , including Jon Bernthal as Frank Castle / Punisher , Ben Barnes as Billy Russo , Amber Rose Revah as Dinah Madani , and Jason R. Moore as Curtis Hoyle .
Announced as joining them for the season were Josh Stewart as John Pilgrim , Floriana Lima as Krista Dumont , and Giorgia Whigham as Amy Bendix , with Corbin Bernsen as Anderson Shultz and Annette O'Toole as Eliza Schultz announced in May. FILMING Section::::Filming .
Filming for the season had begun by March 10 , 2018 , in The Bellmores , New York .
Filming occurred in Albany , New York , in mid - July 2018 , with production on the season wrapping in August 2018 .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The second season of The Punisher is expected to be released in January 2019 on the streaming service Netflix , worldwide .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
By mid - June 2018 , discussions were underway regarding the season being promoted at San Diego Comic - Con that year .
Bernthal was already set to be at the convention to promote his role in the ninth season of The Walking Dead .
A teaser for the season was included in Netflix 's announcement of titles coming to the service in January 2019 , and announcing the season was " coming soon " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS