WWE GREATEST
ROYAL RUMBLE
WWE Greatest Royal Rumble was a professional wrestling pay - per - view event and WWE Network event promoted by WWE for their Raw and SmackDown brands .
The event was held on April 27 , 2018 at the King Abdullah Sports City 's King Abdullah International Stadium in Jeddah , Saudi Arabia .
The event was scheduled for 7:00 p.m. local time .
It aired live in the United States at noon EDT , with a pre - show starting at 11 a.m. EDT .
At the event , all men 's main roster championships were defended , in addition to a 50-man Royal Rumble match .
The card comprised ten matches .
In the main event , Braun Strowman won the Greatest Royal Rumble match .
On the undercard , Brock Lesnar retained the Universal Championship against Roman Reigns in a steel cage match , and the WWE Championship match between AJ Styles and Shinsuke Nakamura resulted in a double countout , The Undertaker defeated Rusev in a casket match , and John Cena defeated Triple H in the opening match .
PRODUCTION
BACKGROUND
Section::::Production .
Section::::Background .
Since 1988 , the Royal Rumble has been an annual event held by WWE and is typically shown on pay - per - view .
The event is highlighted by the Royal Rumble match , a battle royal whose participants enter at timed intervals .
The Greatest Royal Rumble included the largest version of the match to date , having a total of 50 participants .
On March 5 , 2018 , WWE and the Saudi General Sports Authority advertised the Greatest Royal Rumble , a live event to be held on April 27 , 2018 , at King Abdullah International Stadium , part of the King Abdullah Sports City , in Jeddah , Saudi Arabia .
The event is a part of a 10-year strategic multi - platform partnership between WWE and the Saudi General Sports Authority in support of Saudi Vision 2030 , Saudi Arabia 's social and economic reform program .
On March 19 , 2018 , WWE scheduled seven championship matches for the event : the WWE Championship , Universal Championship , United States Championship , Intercontinental Championship , SmackDown Tag Team Championship , Raw Tag Team Championship and Cruiserweight Championship were to be defended at the event .
As revealed on March 22 , 2018 , the event was streamed live on the WWE Network .
It also aired on traditional pay - per - view in the United States and internationally .
The event was also the first WWE pay - per - view with Arabic commentary .
In the weeks leading up to the event , the WWE held tryouts in Saudi Arabia .
From these tryouts , eight were selected to receive training by WWE , which would include an opportunity to earn a spot at the Greatest Royal Rumble event itself .
STORYLINES
Section::::Storylines .
The card comprised ten matches that resulted from scripted storylines , where wrestlers portrayed villains , heroes , or less distinguishable characters in scripted events that built tension and culminated in a wrestling match or series of matches , with results predetermined by WWE 's writers on the Raw and SmackDown brands .
Storylines were produced on WWE 's weekly television shows , Monday Night Raw , SmackDown Live , and the cruiserweight - exclusive 205 Live .
On April 9 , Brock Lesnar , who had renewed his WWE contract , was scheduled to defend the Universal Championship against Roman Reigns in a steel cage match as a rematch from WrestleMania 34 .
On the Raw following WrestleMania , Reigns expressed frustration about not being told about his future matches and opponents , singling out the steel cage match with Lesnar .
Reigns alleged that there was a conspiracy against him .
Samoa Joe , who had been out with an injury since January , came out and warned Reigns that Lesnar would beat him again .
On March 26 , WWE scheduled a ladder match between then - champion
The Miz , Seth Rollins , Finn Bálor , and Samoa Joe for the Intercontinental Championship .
At WrestleMania 34 , The Miz lost the Intercontinental Championship to Rollins , thus making Rollins the defending champion .
Both Miz and Joe were traded to SmackDown while Rollins and Bálor remained on Raw .
On March 26 , Cesaro and Sheamus were scheduled to defend the Raw Tag Team Championship against The Hardy Boyz ( Jeff and Matt Hardy ) .
At WrestleMania 34 , however , Cesaro and Sheamus lost the titles to Braun Strowman and 10-year - old Nicholas .
The following night on Raw , Strowman and Nicholas relinquished the titles due to Nicholas being a fourth grader .
Cesaro and Sheamus demanded their titles back , but Raw General Manager Kurt Angle instead scheduled them to face the winner of the four - team Tag Team Eliminator tournament for the vacant titles at the Greatest Royal Rumble .
"
Woken " Matt Hardy and Bray Wyatt won the tournament by defeating Titus Worldwide ( Apollo Crews and Titus O'Neil ) and The Revival ( Dash Wilder and Scott Dawson ) .
Cesaro and Sheamus were then traded to SmackDown during the Superstar Shake - up .
At WrestleMania 34 , The Bludgeon Brothers ( Harper and Rowan ) defeated The Usos ( Jey and Jimmy Uso ) and The New Day 's Big E and Kofi Kingston in a triple threat tag team match to win the SmackDown Tag Team Championship .
On the following SmackDown , The Usos defeated The New Day to earn a title match at Greatest Royal Rumble .
A match between John Cena and Triple H was scheduled on March 26 .
The Undertaker was originally scheduled to face Rusev in a casket match , the first match of its kind in three years .
Due to reasons not entirely clear , Rusev was temporarily replaced by Chris Jericho — this was explained with Rusev 's wife Lana complaining about her husband competing in a casket match — but eventually reinserted back into the match .
Jericho was restored to his original participation in the Greatest Royal Rumble match .
At WrestleMania 34 , Jinder Mahal defeated Randy Orton , Bobby Roode , and Rusev in a fatal - four - way match to win the United States Championship .
Mahal was then traded to Raw and lost the championship to Jeff Hardy and Mahal invoked his rematch clause for the Greatest Royal Rumble .
Hardy was then traded to SmackDown the following night .
At WrestleMania 34 , AJ Styles successfully defended the WWE Championship against Shinsuke Nakamura .
After the match , Nakamura showed his respect to Styles but then attacked him with a low blow and a Kinshasa , turning heel .
On April 17 , after repeated attacks on Styles by Nakamura , a rematch between the two was scheduled for the Greatest Royal Rumble .
On the WrestleMania 34 pre - show , Cedric Alexander defeated Mustafa Ali in the WWE Cruiserweight Championship tournament final to win the vacant title .
Two nights later on 205 Live , Buddy Murphy attacked the new champion during his celebration .
Murphy was then scheduled to face Alexander for the title at the Greatest Royal Rumble , but he failed his mandatory weigh - in when he weighed 207 pounds , 2 pounds over the 205 pound weight limit .
He was then removed from the match and banned from competing on 205 Live until he met the weight requirement .
The following week , Kalisto earned a Cruiserweight Championship match at the Greatest Royal Rumble by winning a gauntlet match .
EVENT PRELIMINARY
MATCHES Section::::Event .
Section::::Preliminary matches .
+ Other on - screen personnel !
Role : !
Name : rowspan=3English commentators Michael Cole Corey Graves
Byron Saxton rowspan=2Spanish commentators Carlos Cabrera Marcelo Rodríguez rowspan=3Arabic commentators Faisal Almughaisib Sultan Alharbi Jude Aldajani
Ring announcer Greg Hamilton
rowspan=7Referees
Danilo Anfibio Jason Ayers John Cone Dan Engler Darrick Moore
Chad Patton
Ryan Tran
Interviewer Mike Rome
rowspan=4Pre - show panel Byron Saxton Jerry Lawler Jim Ross Booker T
The actual pay - per - view opened with John Cena facing Triple H.
During the match , Cena performed an Attitude Adjustment on Triple H for a near - fall .
Cena attempted another Attitude Adjustment but Triple H countered into a Pedigree for a near - fall .
In the end , Cena performed a second Attitude Adjustment on Triple H , a catapult into the corner , and a third Attitude Adjustment to pick up the victory .
Following the match , Cena thanked the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for their hospitality , and expressed excitement over the event .
In the following match , Cedric Alexander defended the Cruiserweight Championship against Kalisto .
The match ended when Alexander countered a Salida Del Sol attempt into a Lumbar Check to retain the title .
Next , the vacant Raw Tag Team Championship was contested between the team of Bray Wyatt and Matt Hardy and the former champions , Cesaro and Sheamus .
In the end , Hardy distracted Sheamus , allowing Wyatt to perform a Sister Abigail on him .
Hardy and Wyatt then performed a wheelbarrow Twist of Fate on Sheamus to win the titled .
Jeff Hardy then defended the United States Championship against Jinder Mahal .
Hardy performed a Swanton Bomb on Mahal to retain the title .
After that , The Bludgeon Brothers defended the SmackDown Tag Team Championship against The Usos .
Harper and Rowan retained the titles after performing The Reckoning on Jimmy Uso .
Next , Seth Rollins defended the Intercontinental Championship against Finn Balor , Samoa Joe and The Miz in a Ladder match .
Near the end of the match , Balor attempted to retrieve the title , only for Rollins to springboard onto the ladder and retrieve the title belt , thus retaining the championship .
In a segment between matches , four prospects from the recent Saudi tryouts came out to the ring to introduce themselves .
Cruiserweight Ariya Daivari and his brother Shawn Daivari , who had not appeared for WWE in many years , came out to interrupt them .
The Saudi prospects attacked and cleared the Daivari brothers from the ring .
Later , AJ Styles defended the WWE Championship against Shinsuke Nakamura .
During the match , Nakamura resorted to various illegal tactics , such as a low blow , increasingly frustrating Styles .
In the end , both Nakamura and Styles fought outside of the ring , only for the match to end in a double countout .
After the match , Styles performed a Phenomenal Forearm to the floor on Nakamura .
After that , The Undertaker fought Rusev ( who was accompanied by Aiden English ) in a Casket match .
At the end of the match , Undertaker performed a chokeslam on Rusev and rolled him into the casket .
Before he could close the lid , English attacked the Undertaker , who retaliated with another chokeslam and a Tombstone Piledriver before putting English into the casket alongside Rusev and closing it for the victory .
In the penultimate match , Brock Lesnar ( accompanied by Paul Heyman ) defended the Universal Championship against Roman Reigns in a steel cage match .
Reigns performed three spears on Lesnar for a near - fall .
As Reigns tried to escape through the door , Heyman pushed the door into Reigns , allowing Lesnar to execute an F5 on Reigns for a near - fall .
In the end , Reigns performed a Spear through the cage wall on Lesnar .
Despite Reigns touching the floor first , the referee awarded the win to Lesnar , thereby retaining the Universal Championship .
MAIN EVENT Section::::Main event .
Daniel Bryan and Dolph Ziggler began the 50-man Royal Rumble match as the first two entrants .
Bryan survived until the final three , beating Rey Mysterio for the longest time spent in a single Royal Rumble match of all time at an hour and sixteen minutes .
In the end , Big Cass eliminated Bryan and attempted a big boot on Braun Strowman , who countered and eliminated Cass to win the match .
Strowman also achieved the most eliminations of a single Royal Rumble match at 13 , beating out a record previously held by Roman Reigns with 12 .
Post - match , Strowman received a trophy and a green championship belt .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
WWE had been criticized for holding the event without female wrestlers , who were unable to perform at the event due to the limited rights women have in Saudi Arabia .
Triple H , WWE 's Executive Vice President of Talent , Live Events and Creative , responded to the criticism : " I understand that people are questioning it , but you have to understand that every culture is different and just because you do n't agree with a certain aspect of it , it does n't mean it 's not a relevant culture ...
You ca n't dictate to a country or a religion about how they handle things but , having said that , WWE is at the forefront of a women 's evolution in the world and what you ca n't do is effect change anywhere by staying away from it ...
While women are not competing in the event , we have had discussions about that and hope that , in the next few years they will be " .
Women were in attendance for the event , though only if accompanied by a male guardian .
This was a major change from previous events , which were only open to men .
Associated Press noted that this is due to " a series of social changes " by the Crown Prince Mohammad bin Salman .
During the event , WWE aired a promotional video , which included WWE female wrestlers .
The Saudi General Sports Authority issued an apology for " indecent material " that aired at the event .
In addition to the women , wrestler Sami Zayn did not participate in the event as Zayn is of Syrian descent , and Saudi Arabia has strained relations with Syria .
On the Raw after the event , a storyline excuse was given in where Sami was suffering from vertigo given to him by Bobby Lashley and therefore could n't compete .
Another subject of criticism was the situation of LGBT rights in Saudi Arabia , as in Saudi Arabia homosexual intercourse is illegal and can be punished by death .
Al - Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula , a militant group offshoot of Al - Qaeda in Yemen , issued a warning to bin Salman and criticized the WWE event stating that " Disbelieving wrestlers exposed their privates and on most of them was the sign of the cross , in front of a mixed gathering of young Muslim men and women .
The corruptors did not stop at that , for every night musical concerts are being announced , as well as movies and circus shows . "
RESULTS TAG TEAM
ELIMINATOR BRACKET
Section::::Results .
Section::::Tag Team Eliminator bracket .
GREATEST ROYAL RUMBLE MATCH ENTRANCES AND ELIMINATIONS
Section::::Greatest Royal Rumble match entrances and eliminations . !
Draw !
Entrant !
Brand !
Order !
Eliminated by !
Time !
Elimination(s )
*
By eliminating 13 men , Braun Strowman broke the record of 12 , set by Roman Reigns at the 2014 Royal Rumble .
* Daniel Bryan broke the longevity record for lasting 1:16:05 , previous record held by Rey Mysterio ( lasting 1:02:12 ) at the 2006 Royal Rumble .
CHAMPIONSHIP BELT Section::::Championship belt .
At the conclusion of the Greatest Royal Rumble , Braun Strowman was awarded a trophy and a championship title .
The role of this Greatest Royal Rumble Championship , however remains unclear .
According to The Sportster , " the likelihood is that nothing that took place in the main event will have any effect on anything once WWE arrives back in the United States and resume normal service . "
Thus far , the belt has not reappeared on WWE programs .
The base design is similar to the current design of the WWE Championship , with some differences .
Instead of a large cut out of the WWE logo , the center plate is modeled with an Arabic pattern with the WWE logo in the center .
Like the WWE Championship belt and other belts introduced in 2016 and 2017 , the Greatest Royal Rumble Championship belt contains two side plates , both separated by gold divider bars , with removable round sections that can be replaced with the current champion 's logo ; the default plates show the official logo of Saudi General Sports Authority , which is identical to the national emblem of Saudi Arabia .
The plates are on a green leather strap resembling the color of the national flag of Saudi Arabia .
SEE ALSO * 2018 in professional wrestling
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS