BETTER CALL SAUL ( SEASON 3 )
The third season of the American television drama series Better Call Saul premiered on April 10 , 2017 , and concluded on June 19 , 2017 .
The ten - episode season was broadcast on Monday nights in the United States on AMC .
Better Call Saul is a spin - off of Breaking Bad created by Vince Gilligan and Peter Gould who also worked on Breaking Bad .
The third season begins right after the end of the second season , which took place in late 2002 , by the time the season concludes , the year is 2003 .
Bob Odenkirk reprises his role as James Morgan " Jimmy " McGill , a lawyer who is engaged in a sibling - feud with his lawyer brother Chuck ( Michael McKean ) , who believes Jimmy is unfit to be a lawyer and plots to have him disbarred from the practice .
Jonathan Banks also reprises his role as Mike Ehrmantraut , who is in partnership with Gustavo Fring ( Giancarlo Esposito ) while Nacho Varga ( Michael Mando ) , is plotting trying to murder their rival , Hector Salamanca ( Mark Margolis ) .
PRODUCTION
CASTING
Section::::Production .
Section::::Casting .
This season of Better Call Saul features the return of several Breaking Bad cast members , most notably Giancarlo Esposito ( Gus Fring ) , who returned in the second episode " Witness " .
In a Q&A with AMC , Esposito expressed excitement on his return into the Breaking Bad world saying , " I 'm extremely excited .
I 'm over the moon .
I love this family of filmmakers a great deal .
I know Better Call Saul is a little bit of a different show than Breaking Bad was
and I love the success it 's had .
It has such wonderful talent in the show .
Bob Odenkirk is just stellar .
Obviously the opportunity to tell some of the backstory of Gus and how he rose to power and how he came to be is always something I 've wanted to explore in a very subtle way in the right venue . "
He also distinguished the show 's version of Gus from the original show describing his character as " a little fresher , a little less jaded .
The time period alone takes us to a time where his look may be little bit different .
I wanted him to be little more hopeful , a little more energetic , maybe not as definitive in some of his actions because he 's a Gus that we 've never met before . "
All of the main cast returns for this season .
Bob Odenkirk returns as James Morgan " Jimmy " McGill .
Jonathan Banks returns as Mike Ehrmantraut .
Rhea Seehorn returns as Kimberly " Kim " Wexler .
Michael McKean returns as Charles L. " Chuck " McGill , Jr. , Jimmy 's elder brother .
Patrick Fabian returns as Howard Hamlin and Michael Mando as Ignacio " Nacho " Varga .
This is the first season of Better Call Saul to feature Giancarlo Esposito as a member of the main cast .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Better Call Saul is set and filmed in Albuquerque , New Mexico , the same location as its predecessor .
In the first scene from the first episode of this season , Jimmy / Saul is using his Gene Takovic alias while working at a Cinnabon in an Omaha , Nebraska shopping mall .
The Cinnabon scenes in Better Call Saul are set in Omaha , but filmed at the Cottonwood Mall in Albuquerque .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* Bob Odenkirk as James Morgan " Jimmy " McGill , a lawyer , who is involved in a sibling - feud with his brother Chuck .
* Jonathan Banks as Mike Ehrmantraut , who is engaged in a feud with the Salamancas .
* Rhea Seehorn as Kimberly " Kim " Wexler , Jimmy 's close friend and lover who sets up a law firm with him .
* Patrick Fabian as Howard Hamlin , a partner of Chuck at Hamlin , Hamlin & McGill and Jimmy 's rival .
* Michael Mando as Ignacio " Nacho " Varga , a member of the Salamanca drug ring , who secretly works with Mike in taking down Hector .
* Giancarlo Esposito as Gustavo " Gus " Fring , a methamphetamine distributor who uses his fast food restaurant chain Los Pollos Hermanos as a front .
* Michael McKean as Charles Lindbergh " Chuck " McGill , Jr. , Jimmy 's elder brother , who allegedly suffers from electromagnetic hypersensitivity , forcing him to stay indoors permanently .
RECURRING
* Mark Margolis as Hector Salamanca , Tuco 's uncle and leader of the Salamanca drug ring .
* Jeremiah Bitsui as Victor , Gus ' henchman , reprising his role from Breaking Bad .
* Kerry Condon as Stacey Ehrmantraut , Mike 's widowed daughter - in - law and the mother of Kaylee Ehrmantraut .
* Tina Parker as Francesca Liddy , Saul 's secretary , reprising her role from Breaking Bad .
* Omar Maskati as Omar , Jimmy 's assistant at Davis & Main .
* Vincent Fuentes as Arturo , a criminal associate of Hector Salamanca .
* Rex Linn as Kevin Wachtell , chairman of Mesa Verde Bank and Trust and a client of HHM and Kim .
* Cara Pifko as Paige Novick , senior legal counsel for Mesa Verde Bank and Trust and a friend of Kim .
* Ann Cusack as Rebecca Bois , Chuck 's ex - wife .
* Tamara Tunie as Anita , a support group member .
* Manuel Uriza as Ximenez Lecerda , an associate of Hector Salamanca .
* Josh Fadem as Camera Guy , a film student who helps Jimmy on various projects .
* Hayley Holmes as Drama Girl , a film student who helps Jimmy on various projects .
* Brandon K. Hampton as Ernesto , Chuck 's assistant who works at HHM .
* Jean Effron as Irene , an elderly client of Jimmy McGill overcharged by Sandpiper Crossing .
*
Joe DeRosa as Dr. Caldera , a veterinarian who serves as Mike 's liaison to the criminal underworld .
* Juan Carlos Cantu as Manuel Varga , Nacho 's father who is the owner of a car restoration shop .
GUEST STARS
* Max Arciniega as Domingo " Krazy-8 " Molina , reprising his role from Breaking Bad .
* Ray Campbell as Tyrus , reprising his role from Breaking Bad .
* Laura Fraser as Lydia Rodarte - Quayle , reprising her role from Breaking Bad .
* Lavell Crawford as Huell Babineaux , reprising his role from Breaking Bad .
* Steven Bauer as Don Eladio Vuente , reprising his role from Breaking Bad .
* Kimberly Hebert Gregory as Kyra Hay , a deputy district attorney .
* Brendan Fehr as Bauer , a military captain .
* John Getz as Chairman , a lawyer and a member of the New Mexico Bar Association .
* Mel Rodriguez as Marco Pasternak , a friend of Jimmy 's from Cicero , Illinois .
* Clea DuVall as Dr. Lara Cruz , Chuck 's doctor .
* Javier Grajeda as Juan Bolsa , a high - level member of the Juárez drug cartel that includes the Salamancas and Gus Fring , reprising his role from Breaking Bad .
* Mark Proksch as Daniel " Pryce " Wormald , a seller of pharmaceuticals and small - time drug dealer * Jessie Ennis as Erin Brill , an employee at Davis & Main .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
TALKING SAUL
Section::::Talking Saul .
These episodes discuss season three of Better Call Saul .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The third season of Better Call Saul , much like the previous two , received critical acclaim , particularly for the character development of Jimmy McGill .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the third season has an approval rating of 97 % based on 35 reviews , with an average rating of 8.82/10 .
The site 's critical consensus is , " Better Call Saul shows no signs of slipping in season 3 , as the introduction of more familiar faces causes the inevitable transformation of its lead to pick up exciting speed . "
On the review aggregator website Metacritic , the season has a score of 87 out of 100 , based on 18 critics , indicating " universal acclaim " .
Terri Schwartz of IGN gave the third season 9.1/10 , giving praise to Jimmy 's character development , stating , " Better Call Saul was better than it 's ever been in Season 3 . "
Verne Gay of Newsday gave it an " A+ " grade and wrote , " Based on the first two episodes , Saul is making a case that it could be even better than Breaking Bad . "
RATINGS Notes
Live +7 ratings were not available , so Live +3 ratings have been used instead .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . ! align="left
"
Ceremony ! align="left
"
Category ! align="left
"
Recipients ! align="left
" Result rowspan="4"69th Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards Outstanding Music Supervision Thomas Golubić ( " Sunk Costs " ) rowspan="2"Outstanding Single - Camera Picture Editing for a Drama Series Skip Macdonald ( " Chicanery " ) Kelley Dixon and Skip Macdonald ( " Witness " ) Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Comedy or Drama Series ( One Hour )
Phillip W. Palmer , Larry Benjamin , Kevin Valentine ( " Witness " ) rowspan="5"69th
Primetime Emmy Awards
Outstanding Drama Series
Better Call Saul Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series Bob Odenkirk Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series Jonathan Banks Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series Vince Gilligan ( " Witness " )
Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series Gordon Smith ( " Chicanery " ) PLOT CHUCK 'S FATE Section::::Plot .
Section::::Chuck 's fate .
Jimmy tries to make amends with Chuck in the season 3 finale , " Lantern " , but Chuck coldly cuts ties with Jimmy .
After forcing Jimmy away , Chuck 's EHS symptoms begin to re - emerge , and he becomes obsessed with disabling all electronic devices in his home to the point of tearing walls open to remove the wiring .
He eventually reaches a breaking point and knocks the gas lantern over , setting fire to his house , while he is still inside .
After this scene there was much speculation as to what happened to Chuck after the fire started .
Showrunner Peter Gould said , " I do n't want to define anything more than what 's on screen " .
Michael McKean , who played Chuck , told Vulture : " I got a call on my cell from Peter [ and ] Vince [ Gilligan ] .
I said , ' If this is the death call , I 'm going to pull over . '
And that 's what I did .
I pulled into the parking lot of the bookstore and I called them back
and they told me what they had planned .
They told me they had laughed about what I had said , but they had to deliver it . "
When asked if his character was dead , McKean said , " I am .
I know they want to bring me in for some flashbacks this coming season , but that 's kind of beside the point . "
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The third season was released on Blu - ray and DVD in region 1 on January 16 , 2018 .
The set contains all 10 episodes , plus audio commentaries for every episode and several behind - the - scenes featurettes .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS