HOUSE OF CARDS ( SEASON 6 )
The sixth and final season of the American political drama web television series House of Cards was confirmed by Netflix on December 4 , 2017 , and was released on November 2 , 2018 .
Unlike previous seasons that consisted of thirteen episodes each , the sixth season consists of only eight .
The season does not include former lead actor Kevin Spacey , who was fired from the show due to sexual misconduct allegations .
PRODUCTION UNANNOUNCED START AND SUDDEN SHUTDOWN
Section::::Production .
Section::::Unannounced start and sudden shutdown .
On October 11 , 2017 , The Baltimore Sun reported that House of Cards had been renewed for a sixth season and that filming would begin by the end of October 2017 .
On October 18 , 2017 , production of the sixth season of House of Cards appeared to be already in progress , without an official renewal announcement by Netflix , when a gunman opened fire near a House of Cards set outside Baltimore .
Production company Media Rights Capital and Netflix stated that production on the show was not impacted by the shooting .
Production on the series was shut down on October 30 , 2017 , following actor Anthony Rapp 's sexual assault allegation that Kevin Spacey had made a sexual advance on him in 1986 , when Rapp was 14 years old .
Netflix announced its decision to cancel the series after the upcoming season , although multiple sources stated that the decision to end the series had been made prior to Rapp 's accusation .
The following day , Netflix and MRC announced that production on the season would be suspended indefinitely , in order to review the current situation and to address any concerns of the cast and crew .
Robin Wright strongly opposed Netflix executives who wanted to cancel the season , as she was concerned about the 2,500 people who had been involved in the production at that time and were at risk of losing their jobs .
On November 3 , 2017 , Netflix announced that they would no longer be associated with Spacey in any capacity whatsoever .
RESTARTING PRODUCTION Section::::Restarting production .
On December 4 , 2017 , Ted Sarandos , Netflix 's chief content officer , announced that production would restart in 2018 with Wright in the lead , without Spacey 's involvement , and revealed that the sixth and final season of the show would consist of eight episodes .
House of Cards resumed production on January 31 , and wrapped filming four months later , on May 25 , 2018 .
The firing of Kevin Spacey significantly affected the production process , as showrunners Frank Pugliese and Melissa Gibson had to rethink the show and come up with a conclusion for the series in a limited amount of time , taking into consideration other contractual obligations of the cast and crew .
In an interview with IndieWire , Pugliese and Gibson revealed that these changes did not represent a huge shift for many of the characters ; it was the overall story that was mostly affected , which was initially intended to center on a struggle between Frank and Claire to own the White House .
The showrunners also revealed that — even in his absence — Frank continues to have a big impact on the story , and noted that erasing him completely would have seemed disingenuous .
In the wake of Spacey 's firing , Wright leads the sixth season of House of Cards , with her character , Claire Underwood , having assumed the presidency at the end of the previous season .
A number of returning cast members reprised their roles from previous seasons , while Alik Sakharov , who had helmed three episodes in season five , directed for the final season as well .
New additions to the cast included Diane Lane and Greg Kinnear , who played Annette and Bill Shepherd , the sister - brother inheritors of an industrial conglomerate ; said characters were inspired by the Koch brothers , as members of a family with the power to influence American politics .
Joining them , Australian actor Cody Fern plays Annette 's ambitious son Duncan Shepherd .
Lane had been cast to play Claire 's longtime friend prior to Spacey 's firing , with whom she had shot a number of scenes .
However , as she told IndieWire , the writers " managed to find the same trajectory for [ her ] character in terms of what she means to Claire . "
CAST AND CHARACTERS
MAIN
RECURRING
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
From March to October 2018 , Netflix released various promotional material for the sixth and final season of House of Cards .
On March 4 , the first teaser premiered during the 90th Academy Awards ceremony .
The teaser shows Robin Wright in the Oval Office as President Claire Underwood , declaring " We 're just getting started , " followed by an intertitle reading " Hail to the Chief " .
On June 10 , Netflix released two first - look images from the final season .
The first photo shows Wright listening to director Alik Sakharov , and the second shows her looking straight at the camera .
On July 4 , the 242nd anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration of Independence , a video message was posted on House of Cards official Twitter account , with President Claire Underwood saying , " Happy Independence Day ... to me .
" The message is followed by the hashtag # MyTurn .
On August 7 , Netflix announced that the season would be released on November 2 , 2018 , and unveiled key art .
The poster pays homage to the promotional image for the first season of the series , as Wright strikes the Lincoln Memorial pose , like Kevin Spacey had done before her .
On August 27 , four images were published via a press release , which depict new cast members Diane Lane , Greg Kinnear and Cody Fern in their roles as members of the Shepherd family .
A teaser trailer released on September 5 , revealed the fate of Frank Underwood , portrayed by Spacey who was fired from the show , months after the conclusion of the fifth season .
It is shown that Frank died in 2017 , and has been buried next to his father in South Carolina .
Claire visits her husband 's grave and says , " I 'll tell you this though , Francis .
When they bury me , it wo n't be in my backyard .
And when they pay their respects , they 'll have to wait in line .
"
This speech mirrors the one Frank gives in the third season of the series , when he visits his father 's grave .
On September 27 , Netflix released a new teaser trailer that presents several new and returning characters .
Claire is shown dealing with the aftermath of her husband 's death , and declaring that " the reign of the middle - aged white man is over . "
On October 8 , Netflix released the official trailer for the season , which revolves around Claire 's power struggle , as she clashes with the American oligarchs and tries to forge her own path as President of the United States .
On October 23 , critics began publishing reviews on the season , based on advance copies of the first five episodes that they had received from Netflix , after they had signed a letter of agreement .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Prior to the official release date of the season , Netflix sent the first five episodes to a number of critics , to serve as advance screeners .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the season has an approval rating of 71 % based on 59 reviews , with an average rating of 6.19/10 .
The consensus reads , " House of Cards folds slightly under the weight of its labyrinthian ending – thankfully Robin Wright 's commanding performance is strong enough to keep it standing strong . "
On Metacritic , the season has a weighted average score of 62 out of 100 , based on 21 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Kevin Lever of FilmEra wrote that " with Wright at the forefront of the show now , House of Cards shines as it did in its early years .
" Lever described the production as " stellar " and the writing as " reinvigorated " .
He noted that the show still has the feel of previous years , but it works best when it focuses on Claire , instead of dealing with holdover pieces .
David Zurawik of The Baltimore Sun wrote , " I love TV drama that speaks to the cultural moment the way this series does .
And , as I have said over and over , # MeToo is a landmark moment . "
Zurawik revealed that the season primarily focuses on gender issues ; the evil of patriarchy and the stench of misogyny .
He stated that the episodes exceeded his expectations , and praised the performances of Wright , Lane and Kinnear .
Christopher Hooton of The Independent described the episodes as " slightly banal " .
He expressed his disappointment at the new characters that were introduced this season , and commented that " Frank Underwood has left behind not only a power vacuum but an entertainment one . "
Hooton noted that ever since Frank became president at the end of season two , the series has drifted directionless , and after watching the first five episodes of the final season , it still remains unclear what the show is actually about .
Negative reviews include one by Tyler Coates of Esquire , who writes : " Kevin Spacey 's absence haunts the final season of House of Cards .
Just as the show would n't work without Claire Underwood , it does n't exactly work without Frank . "
Another by Sonia Saraiya of Vanity Fair writes : " House of Cards collapses – finally .
Down a star and out of things to say , Season 6 flounders .
" Jack Seale of The Guardian rated the season 2 stars out of 5 stating , " We still need to talk about Kevin .
It 's impossible not to miss Spacey 's presence as Robin Wright struggles to make her mark and save Netflix 's first big show . "
The series finale in particular was met with largely negative reviews .
Scott Von Doviak of The A.V. Club gave the episode a " C- " , praising Wright 's direction but criticizing the writing and the characterization of Claire during the final season .
Kyle Fowle of Entertainment Weekly gave the episode a " D " rating , saying the ultimate flaw of the season and the finale was the large focus on Frank and Frank 's legacy .
Todd VanDerWerff of Vox gave the finale a one - and - a - half star rating out of five , saying the season " saved the worst for last " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS