FREAKY FRIDAY ( SONG ) " Freaky Friday " is a song recorded by American rapper Lil Dicky , featuring guest vocals from American singer Chris Brown and uncredited vocals from Ed Sheeran , DJ Khaled , and Kendall Jenner .
Written by Dicky , Brown , Cashmere Cat , Lewis Hughes , Wilbart McCoy III , Ammo and its producers DJ Mustard , Benny Blanco and Twice as Nice , it was released by Dirty Burd on March 15 , 2018 , alongside its music video .
The song topped the charts in the United Kingdom and New Zealand , and peaked at number eight on the Billboard Hot 100 .
The song has also reached the top ten of the charts in Australia , Canada and Ireland .
COMPOSITION Section::::Composition .
" Freaky Friday " is a hip hop and comedy hip hop song featuring a pop - rap production .
MUSIC VIDEO Section::::Music video .
The music video parodies the 2003 film Freaky Friday and features cameos from Jimmy Tatro , Ed Sheeran , DJ Khaled and Kendall Jenner .
As of December 2018 , the video had over 440 million views on YouTube .
The video shows Lil Dicky at a Chinese restaurant , similar to the 2003 film , Freaky Friday , where a character is at a Chinese restaurant and wishes she was somebody else .
In the music video , Lil Dicky is approached by a fan , played by Jimmy Tatro , who mentions he is a fan of his work .
He then explains to his girlfriend who he is accompanied by that he is a comedic rapper , who is not that impressive of a rapper .
Lil Dicky then says to himself he wishes he was somebody who could dance , and who had credibility .
The camera then pans to Chris Brown on TV , mentioning he wishes he was somebody else as well .
The Chinese waiter takes note of it , and gives Lil Dicky a fortune cookie .
The video then shows Lil Dicky , supposedly in the body of Chris Brown , and vice versa .
The song illustrates the two in each others ' bodies .
Towards the end , the two are about to fight , and they realize they should not kill each other , and instead love each other .
They realize that this will set them back to their original form .
The video then ends with cameos from Ed Sheeran , DJ Khaled and Kendall Jenner , where Lil Dicky is then in possession in all of their bodies .
CREDITS AND PERSONNEL Section::::Credits and personnel .
Credits adapted from Tidal .
* Lil Dicky – composition , engineering * Chris Brown – composition * Cashmere Cat – composition * Lewis Hughes – composition * Wilbart McCoy III – composition * Ammo – composition * DJ Mustard – composition , production * Benny Blanco – composition ,
production
*
Twice as Nice – composition , production * Serban Ghenea –
mix engineering * Patrizio Pigliarono – engineering CHARTS WEEKLY CHARTS
Section::::Charts .
Section::::Weekly charts . ! scope="col " Chart ( 2018 ) ! scope="col " Peak position ! scope="row " Greece ( IFPI Greece ) ! scope="row " Ireland ( IRMA ) ! scope="row " US Hot R&B Songs ( Billboard ) YEAR - END CHARTS Section::::Year - end charts .
! scope="col " Chart ( 2018 ) ! scope="col " Position !
scope="row " Canada ( Canadian Hot 100 ) ! scope="row " New Zealand ( Recorded Music NZ ) ! scope="row " US Billboard Hot 100 ! scope="row " US Hot R&B / Hip - Hop Songs
( Billboard )
CERTIFICATIONS
RELEASE HISTORY Section::::Release history .
!
scope="col " Region ! scope="col " Date ! scope="col " Format ! scope="col " Label ! scope="col " ! scope="row
" Various ! scope="row " United States REFERENCES