A PLACE TO CALL HOME ( SEASON 6 )
The sixth and final season ( also known as A Place to Call Home : The Final Chapter ) of the Seven Network television series A Place to Call Home premiered on Showcase 19 August 2018 .
The series is produced by Chris Martin - Jones , and executive produced by Penny Win and Julie McGauran .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On 6 December 2017 , Foxtel announced that A Place to Call Home had been renewed for a sixth season .
It was later announced , on 19 March 2018 that the 10-episode sixth season would be the series ' last .
Production on the sixth season began on 19 March 2018 .
Of the show 's return , Foxtel 's Executive Director of Television , Brian Walsh stated , " Simply put , A Place to Call Home is one of the finest pieces of drama ever produced for Australian television .
The series will be long remembered for its captivating narrative , outstanding performances and world class production values .
Foxtel is proud to have been its home for the past four seasons and there is no doubt that it will be missed .
A Place to Call Home was a series which was saved by its fans and
so the journey of this , the final chapter , is a very important one .
It was imperative for us that the series retain its integrity and that we would bring the series to a close at its natural story point and that is what everyone who loves the show can expect . "
Foxtel 's Head of Drama , Penny Win stated , " At Foxtel we have loved bringing this series to audiences and we know that it will be a beautiful closing chapter created by Bevan Lee , and the amazing cast and crew . "
Seven 's Head of Drama , Julie McGauran stated , " Seven Studios is once again delighted to partner with Foxtel to bring this stunning series to a defining and memorable ending . "
The series ' Script Executive , Bevan Lee stated " Season 6 truly completes my vision for the series .
I promise to bring the show to its finale on a wave of tears , laughter and most importantly , closure . "
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Season six will take place in 1959 .
CAST MAIN * Marta Dusseldorp as Sarah Bligh * Noni Hazelhurst as Elizabeth Goddard
* Brett Climo as George Bligh * Craig Hall as Dr. Jack Duncan * David Berry as James Bligh * Abby Earl as Anna Bligh * Arianwen Parkes - Lockwood as Olivia Bligh * Sara Wiseman as Carolyn Duncan
* Tim Draxl as Dr. Henry Fox
* Deborah Kennedy as Doris Collins
* Dominic Allburn as Harry Polson
* Frankie J. Holden as Roy Briggs RECURRING & GUEST
* Elliot Domoney as David Bligh * Madeleine Clunies - Ross as Leah Gold * Conrad Coleby as Matthew Goddard * Clodagh Crowe as Dawn Briggs EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
RATINGS
Section::::Ratings . !
No . !
Title !
Air date !
Viewers !
Rank REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS