THE FLASH ( SEASON 5 )
The fifth season of the American television series The Flash , which is based on the DC Comics character Barry Allen / Flash , premiered on The CW on October 9 , 2018 and is set to consist of 22 episodes .
The season follows Barry , a crime scene investigator with superhuman speed who fights criminals , including others who have also gained superhuman abilities , as he deals with the consequences of his future daughter 's time traveling .
It is set in the Arrowverse , sharing continuity with the other television series of the universe , and is a spin - off of Arrow .
The season is produced by Berlanti Productions , Warner Bros. Television , and DC Entertainment , with Todd Helbing serving as showrunner .
The season was ordered in April 2018 , and production began that July .
Grant Gustin stars as Barry , with principal cast members Candice Patton , Danielle Panabaker , Carlos Valdes , Tom Cavanagh , and Jesse L. Martin also returning from previous seasons , while Hartley Sawyer , Danielle Nicolet , and Jessica Parker Kennedy were promoted to series regulars from their recurring statuses in season four .
They are joined by new cast member Chris Klein .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
Danielle Panabaker will direct the eighteenth episode of the season .
Rebecca Johnson and Kevin Smith will also direct episodes this season .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* Grant Gustin as Barry Allen /
Flash
* Candice Patton as Iris West - Allen * Danielle Panabaker as Caitlin Snow / Killer Frost
* Carlos Valdes as Cisco Ramon / Vibe * Hartley Sawyer as Ralph Dibny / Elongated Man * Danielle Nicolet as Cecile Horton * Jessica Parker Kennedy as Nora West - Allen / XS
* Chris Klein as Orlin Dwyer / Cicada
* Tom Cavanagh as Harrison Wells * Jesse L. Martin as Joe West
RECURRING
* Lossen Chambers as Dr. Ambres
* Kiana Madeira as Spencer Young / Spin * Kyle Secor as Thomas Snow / Icicle
GUEST
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
At the Television Critics Association winter press tour in January 2018 , The CW president Mark Pedowitz said he was " optimistic " and " confident " about The Flash and the other Arrowverse shows returning next season , but added that it was too soon to announce anything just yet .
On April 2 , The CW renewed the series for its fifth season .
Todd Helbing , who had previously served as a co - showrunner for the series ' first four seasons , emerged as the series ' first sole showrunner following Andrew Kreisberg 's firing during the previous season .
WRITING Section::::Writing .
In October 2017 , Kevin Smith revealed that then - executive producer Andrew Kreisberg already had plans for the next season of the show and had told him the story for The Flashs fifth season , which got Smith very excited and jokingly commenting , " I now have to stay alive one more year . "
At San Diego Comic - Con 2018 , Todd Helbing revealed that " legacy " would be a theme during the season , adding , " I think everybody 's thinking about what it means after they leave .
" On the arrival of Barry and Iris ' future daughter , Nora ,
Grant Gustin teased the different headspaces the characters would be in . "
[ Nora ] 's kind of attached to [ Barry ] when she arrives and a little more distant with Iris , " Gustin said .
" It 's a weird thing for Iris to see them bond so easily ...
obviously something happened in the future , which worries Iris , " added Candice Patton .
The season also sees Barry , Ralph , and Iris returning to their professional careers as a CSI , detective , and journalist , respectively .
Patton noted that , " We live in such precarious times where we do n't know what the truth is ...
I feel like [ journalists ] are superheroes ...
I hope that 's a concept we bring to the show and give journalists the praise they deserve . "
Helbing also revealed that there will be " a lot of deaths this season , " and that the main antagonist would not be a speedster for the second season in a row .
The new antagonist , Cicada , instead possesses powers that " present a challenge for Team Flash that they 've never had to deal with before .
" He is not a cult leader as he is in the comics , but is portrayed as a " grizzled , blue - collar everyman whose family has been torn apart by metahumans " and who views the rise of metas as an epidemic , and seeks to exterminate them one by one .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Main cast members Grant Gustin , Candice Patton , Danielle Panabaker , Carlos Valdes , and Jesse L. Martin return from previous seasons as Barry Allen / Flash , Iris West , Caitlin Snow / Killer Frost , Cisco Ramon / Vibe and Joe West , respectively .
Tom Cavanagh also returned as a series regular , playing a new version of his character Harrison Wells , known as Sherloque Wells .
Cavanagh also portrays Herr Wells of Earth-12 in the episode " The Death of Vibe " , Harry Wells of Earth-2 , and Eobard Thawne in the episode
" What 's Past Is Prologue " .
The fifth season is the first not to feature Keiynan Lonsdale , who plays Wally West / Kid Flash , as a series regular since his introduction in the second season , following the character 's move to Legends of Tomorrow during the previous season and Lonsdale 's subsequent departure from that show as well .
He will appear only in three episodes , including the season premiere .
In June 2018 , Danielle Nicolet , Hartley Sawyer , and Jessica Parker Kennedy , who recurred during the previous season as Cecile Horton , Ralph Dibny / Elongated Man , and Nora West - Allen , respectively , were promoted to series regulars for the fifth season .
Nicolet had additionally guest - starred at the end of the first season and had been recurring in the series since the third season .
The season establishes that Nora 's alias is XS , making her an amalgamation of the XS from DC Comics , Jenni Ognats , and Barry and Iris ' daughter in the comics , Dawn Allen .
In July , Chris Klein also joined the main cast as Orlin Dwyer / Cicada , the season 's main antagonist .
In October , it was announced that Martin would take a " medical leave " from the series due to a back injury he sustained over the hiatus .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
The season introduces a new Flash suit , which Todd Helbing described as the series ' most " accurate incarnation " of the Flash suit from the comics .
The season also introduces Barry 's " Flash ring " from the comics .
The new suit adopts brighter colors than previous suits – which had maroon overtones – and , unlike prior incarnations , does not have a chin strap .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Production for the season began on July 6 , 2018 , in Vancouver , British Columbia , and is set to conclude on April 10 , 2019 .
Kevin Smith will direct an episode of the season .
Danielle Panabaker will make her directorial debut this season .
Tom Cavanagh directed the eighth episode of the season , which served as the 100th episode of the series and led into the annual crossover .
Due to Martin 's back injury , the majority of his scenes were shot depicting Joe seated .
ARROWVERSE TIE - INS Section::::Arrowverse tie - ins .
In May 2018 , Arrow star Stephen Amell announced at The CW upfronts that the next Arrowverse crossover would feature Batwoman and Gotham City .
The crossover " Elseworlds " is slated to launch a 2019 solo series for the character .
RELEASE
BROADCAST Section::::Release .
Section::::Broadcast .
The season premiered on The CW in the United States on October 9 , 2018 .
The annual crossover episode will swap time - slots with Supergirl for that week and will air on Sunday , December 9 .
MARKETING Section::::Marketing .
The main cast of the season as well as executive producer Todd Helbing attended San Diego Comic - Con on July 21 , 2018 to promote the season .
Starting on September 14 , 2018 , several billboards advertising Ralph Dibny as a private investigator were seen around Vancouver , the city where the show is filmed .
RECEPTION RATINGS CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 93 % approval rating for the fifth season with an average rating of 7.96/10 , based on 132 reviews .
The website 's consensus reads , " The Flashs fifth season maintains the show 's high standard for compelling visuals , chilling villains , and well - scripted moments of humor , but also turns a more focused gaze on the role of family dynamics amongst the increasingly complex characters . "
Reviewing for Den of Geek , Mike Cecchini gave the premiere a rating of 4.5/5 .
He called it " a genuinely special episode " and " an excellent return to form for the series " , naming it the best season premiere in the show 's history , while directing specific praise to Gustin , Kennedy , and the show 's composer Blake Neely .
IGNs Jesse Schedeen also praised the addition of Kennedy , but expressed concern over the introduction of yet another speedster character , " especially with certain existing characters continuing to be so poorly served " .
He gave the episode a rating of 7.4/10 , adding , " in a lot of ways , things do seem to be looking up for The Flash .
Unfortunately , there are plenty of other reminders that the series has chronic difficulties in juggling its ensemble cast . "
Chancellor Agard of Entertainment Weekly and Scott Von Doviak of The A.V. Club further praised Kennedy 's performance , and gave the premiere a " B+ " and " B " grade , respectively , with Agard concluding , " The Flash is now in its fifth season , which means the show 's accumulated history is one of its greatest strengths it has .
I 'm glad it 's finding both humorous fun and poignant ways to use it as we head towards the 100th episode . "
NOTES REFERENCES Section::::References .
General references EXTERNAL LINKS