211 ( FILM ) 211 is a 2018 American action film directed by York Shackleton and written by York Shackleton and John Rebus .
The film stars Nicolas Cage , Cory Hardrict , Michael Rainey Jr. , Ori Pfeffer and Weston Cage .
The film was released on June 8 , 2018 , by Momentum Pictures .
It is based on the 1997 North Hollywood shootout .
211 refers to the Hundred Code for Robbery used in California , although the story is set in the fictional city of Chesterford , Massachusetts .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Afghanistan Disgruntled mercenaries corner
the boss who owes them money .
Under torture , he discloses it has been wired to various banks including one in Chesterford .
In a Kabul market , Interpol 's Agent Rossi 's operation to catch an antiquities smuggler is interrupted and she is redirected to the crime scene caused by the mercenaries .
United States of America
In Chesterford , Kenny Ralston , a quiet high school student , has an altercation with bullies .
Agent Rossi challenges a gun store manager for information on the mercenaries and receives a warehouse address .
The school vice - principal tells Shawnee Ralston , her son Kenny must go on a police ride - along or face expulsion .
Patrolman Mike Chandler has lost his wife of thirty years to cancer .
His difficulty in expressing his emotions has strained his relationship with his daughter Lisa .
Mike 's patrol partner and son - in - law , Steve , reveals that Lisa is pregnant .
At the bank , an armoured cash transport delivers over $ 1.3million .
Tre , Rob and Luke finalise their heist plan , while Hyde plants a cell phone IED in a restaurant .
Mike and Steve arrive at work .
Kenny signs forms regarding the ride - along .
Responding to a call from headquarters .
Steve and Mike draw their weapons on a suspect and Kenny records it using his smartphone .
The crew storm the bank and threaten everyone .
Near the bank , Steve goes for coffee while Mike and Kenny discuss the school altercation .
Gaining insight , Mike changes his mind regarding Kenny , admitting he would have acted similarly .
On Steve 's return , Mike indicates a black Escalade parked in the red zone outside the bank .
They cross a parking lot to investigate further and inside the bank , Tre orders Hyde to ' make the call ' .
The IED destroys the restaurant .
Police headquarters alerts all patrols to the explosion .
Mike chooses to remain because of Kenny and the less dangerous ' parking violation ' .
Hyde becomes agitated .
The other patrols converge on the restaurant and news reaches the hospital where Shawnee prepares to receive multiple casualties .
Hearing the news , Rossi diverts to Chesterford .
First responders arrive and SWAT Captain Horst issues orders .
Hyde opens fire on the cruiser .
As Mike takes evasive action , Steve alerts headquarters they are taking fire .
Some officers leave the restaurant area to provide backup to Mike and Steve .
Mike crashes the cruiser and gets out , returning fire .
Initially trapped , Steve manages to free himself and then Kenny .
Kenny grabs his phone as he exits the cruiser and Mike eventually kills Hyde .
Realising Steve is seriously injured , Mike fabricates a tourniquet .
Rossi arrives at the restaurant area and Hyde is identified .
The back - up team attempt to evacuate Steve and Mike retrieves a first aid kit .
Inside the bank , Luke uses a 50-cal rifle to shoot Mike but misses .
Two other officers are killed .
Lisa learns of the restaurant explosion and gets Steve 's voicemail .
Steve gets Kenny to record a farewell message on his phone .
The back - up team reach their colleagues .
Moving Steve , they become separated from Kenny who hides in a parked Blazer .
His phone dead , Kenny looks for another battery and hacks a charger .
An EMT assesses
Steve , Hanson returns with a seriously wounded Jacobs and Mike notices Kenny is missing .
Starting a search with Hanson , Mike receives a call from Lisa and prepares her for bad news .
Lisa arrives at the ER and questions the now barely - conscious Jacobs who says Mike is still on scene looking for the ' ride - along kid ' .
Shawnee , in earshot of Jacobs , reacts just as Kenny telephones to let her know he is safe , for now .
Rossi arrives in the command post to witness Mike shouting that his dead son has ' a child on the way ' .
Horst finalises the breach .
Mike and Hanson head for the parking lot to locate and rescue Kenny .
SWAT advances .
Tre orders the hostages out .
Now safe , a hostage reveals something in her pocket .
Horst , identifying another IED , dies selflessly protecting the hostages .
SWAT begin their breach but are repelled .
Rob exits first , firing to cover his escape but gets killed .
Luke is killed at the bank door .
Tre approaches Mike firing wildly .
Hanson is killed .
Mike is wounded and as Tre raises his weapon to kill Mike , Kenny uses Hanson 's side arm to shoot Tre .
Rossi appears and shoots Tre .
As Mike and Kenny sit in an ambulance , Shawnee arrives and hugs her son .
Lisa arrives and embraces her father .
One year later , Mike arrives home after a run .
He is greeted with shouts of Happy Birthday .
Among his well - wishers are Jacobs , Steve , and Mike 's granddaughter .
Stepping towards his visitors , Mike asks Kenny to ' take some new pics ' .
CAST * Nicolas Cage as Mike Chandler * Dwayne Cameron as Steve MacAvoy * Sophie Skelton as Lisa MacAvoy * Alexandra Dinu as Interpol Agent Rossi
* Michael Rainey Jr. as Kenny Ralston
* Shari Watson as Shawnee Ralston * Ori Pfeffer as Tre * Sean James as Rob * Weston Cage as Luke * Michael Bellisario as Hyde
* Cory Hardrict as Officer Hanson
* Jonathan Yunger as Officer Delaney * Sapir Azulay as Officer Jacobs
* Mark Basnight as Police Chief * Atanas Srebrev as Captain Horst * Aaron Cohen as Police Lieutenant * Jason Francis as Police Pilot * Velizar Binev as Randal * Evgeniya Marinkova as Eleanor
* Laura Giosh Markova as Judith
* Amanda Cerny as Sarah * Petar Mitev as Clerk * Manal El Feutiry as Camille , the waitress .
* George Zlatarev as Lt . Col .
Moss * Nadejda Ivanova as Natalia Buskova * Andrew Keelaghan as Ronald Donovan * Raymond Steers as Mandell
* Derek Horse as Floyd
* Fedi Bashur as Brian * Nick Donadio as Treadwell * Aleksander Karastoyanov as Scott * Jamieson Urquhart as Jeff PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On January 27 , 2017 , Nicolas Cage joined the cast of the film .
Filming took place at Nu Boyana studios in Sofia , Bulgaria .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film was released on June 8 , 2018 , by Momentum Pictures .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The film review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes rates it 5 % positive based on 17 reviews with an overall rating of 2.5/10 .
Metacritic reports an aggregate score of 21 out of 100 ( based on 8 critics ) , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews " .
Luke Y. Thompson of Forbes gave it a fresh rating , writing " I ca n't begrudge you waiting until 211 shows up on a Blu - ray at Walmart that also contains ten other Cage movies ...
But I can tell you that when it does , you should n't skip over this one . "
Other reviewers were not as complimentary .
Jacob Knight from Birth Movies Death declared it rotten , writing , " Nic Cage 's latest DTV action endeavour is a bizarre slog .
"
Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun - Times gave it 2/4 and wrote , " A muddled , overcrowded , trigger - happy heist movie brimming with clichés while constantly trying our patience .
"
Glenn Kenny of RogerEbert.com gave it 1/4 , describing it as " This effort is a cavalcade of crap .
Loud crap . "
Frank Scheck of The Hollywood Reporter wrote , " It 's probably foolish to wish that Nicolas Cage would once again make movies as good as Adaptation and Leaving Las Vegas .
But is it too much to ask that he go back to the comparative glory days of Con Air and The Rock ? " .
Dennis Harvey of Variety wrote , " Unsurprisingly , the director does n't get very good work from a cast asked primarily to ramp up the intensity on stereotypes . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS