POKÉMON :
LET 'S
GO , PIKACHU !
AND LET 'S
GO , EEVEE !
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
Pokémon :
Let 's Go , Pikachu !
and Let 's Go , Eevee !
are set in the Kanto region and include the original 151 Pokémon creatures in addition to their respective Mega Evolved forms from Pokémon X and Y & Omega Ruby and Alpha Sapphire , and their Alolan Forms from Sun and Moon .
BATTLE AND POKÉMON CAPTURE MECHANICS
Section::::Battle and Pokémon capture mechanics .
Let 's Go , Pikachu !
and Let 's Go , Eevee !
feature common elements of the main series , such as battling non - player character Pokémon Trainers and Gym Leaders with caught Pokémon creatures .
However , instead of battling them like the traditional battle system of other major Pokémon role - playing games ( RPGs ) , the catching of Pokémon creatures uses a different mechanic that is based on the mobile spin - off game
Pokémon Go where players throw Poké Balls at a wild Pokémon by using the motion controls of the Joy - Con controller .
The action can also be performed with a button press when the Joy - Con controllers are docked to the console in hand - held mode , but this still requires using the motion controls to aim .
If a player uses the motion controls , the catching of Pokémon is based on the player 's timing rather than accuracy .
Although it possible to miss a throw , the ball is almost guaranteed to hit the Pokémon .
MULTIPLAYER GAMEPLAY
CHANGES Section::::Multiplayer gameplay changes .
The games ' control scheme is designed to only require one Joy - Con per player , and the games support cooperative multiplayer .
If another player shakes a second Joy - Con , they join the current player and are able to partake in battles with Pokémon Trainers and wild Pokémon encounters , allowing them to aid the catching of wild Pokémon .
When playing multiplayer , Trainer battles become battles of two Pokémon against one , and in wild encounters , there is the possibility for each player to throw a Poké Ball at the same time , doubling the chances of capturing the Pokémon .
SIMILARITIES TO OTHER GAMES IN THE SERIES Section::::Similarities to other games in the series .
The player character starts with either a Pikachu or an Eevee — depending on the version — which sits on the player character 's shoulder in the overworld .
This mechanic is similar to the " walking Pokémon " mechanic first introduced in Pokémon Yellow , in which Pikachu followed the player character throughout the entire game .
The player character 's partner Pokémon wiggles its tail when the player is near a hidden item , and it can be dressed up for further customization .
Similarly to Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver , the player may also choose a secondary Pokémon to follow them , and some larger Pokémon can also be ridden , a mechanic first seen in Pokémon X and Y and later refined in Sun and Moon .
The eight Gym Leaders and the members of Elite Four from the original game also appear , as well as the antagonist faction Team Rocket , including Jessie , James and Meowth from the anime series .
CHANGES FROM PREVIOUS VERSIONS Section::::Changes from previous versions .
A notable feature in Let 's Go , Pikachu !
and Let 's Go , Eevee !
is that wild Pokémon show up in the overworld , rather than as random encounters in grass or caves like in previous main - series Pokémon RPGs .
To start a battle , the player has to simply interact with a Pokémon in the environment .
The battle screen is reminiscent of Pokémon Go , with the use of berries to pacify a Pokémon and the toss of a Poké Ball to capture it .
POKÉMON EVOLUTION AND BREEDING Section::::Pokémon evolution and breeding .
The evolution mechanic from previous games returns in Let 's Go , Pikachu !
and Let 's Go , Eevee ! ; however , the player 's starting Pikachu or Eevee can not evolve , like Pokémon Yellow .
Only other Pokémon that the player has caught can evolve , including the ones of the same species of the partner Pokémon .
Some features , like Pokémon breeding and HMs , are absent from the games .
GAINING EXPERIENCE AND POWERING UP
Section::::Gaining experience and powering up .
Since Pokémon X and Y , experience points are rewarded to Pokémon not only by defeating opponent Pokémon but also by catching wild Pokémon .
However , in Let 's Go , Pikachu !
and Let 's Go , Eevee !
experience points rewarded by catching wild Pokémon are affected by various multiplier bonuses depending on the timing of the throw and the technique used to throw the Poké Ball , such as performing an overarm or underarm throw .
The game also introduces new items called " candies , " which are used to power up a Pokémon 's statistics , such as HP , Attack , Defense , Sp .
Attack , Sp .
Defense , and Speed .
Different types of candy are awarded to players who transfer their Pokémon to Professor Oak via an in - game storage box . "
Combat Power " ( CP ) also returns from Pokémon Go .
TRADING POKÉMON
Section::::Trading Pokémon .
Players can also trade Pokémon and battle other players both locally and online , with said online features being simplified in comparison with previous games .
Some features — including the Global Trade System , Wonder Trade , and Battle Spot — are absent from Let 's Go , Pikachu !
and Let 's Go , Eevee ! .
To connect with other players to trade online , players use a code made out of the names of three freely - selected Pokémon which , when two players enter the same code , allow them to trade Pokémon with or battle each other .
A subscription to the Nintendo Switch Online service is required to trade and battle online .
Players can also transfer the original first - generation Pokémon and their respective Alolan forms from Pokémon Go to Let 's Go , Pikachu !
or Let 's Go , Eevee ! .
They then appear at the Go Park ; an in - game location that the player can explore where they can interact or catch Pokémon that are walking around , although Pokémon with higher CP or levels are harder to catch , in that the catch attempt has a higher chance of failing .
Users are also able to exchange unspecified " gifts " between Pokémon Go and Let 's Go , Pikachu !
or Let 's Go , Eevee ! .
THE POKÉ BALL PLUS
Section::::The Poké Ball
Plus .
The games support an optional controller , the Poké Ball
Plus .
It is shaped like a Poké Ball and features an analog stick , motion control support , HD Rumble feedback , and lighting effects .
The analog stick doubles as a capture button in case the player does not wish to use the motion controls .
During Nintendo 's E3 2018 Nintendo Direct presentation on June 12 , 2018 , it was revealed that the Poké Ball Plus would come with a Mew that can be transferred to the game .
Although Let 's Go , Pikachu !
and Let 's Go , Eevee !
feature integration with Pokémon Go
, this is optional .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Pokémon :
Let 's Go , Pikachu !
and Let 's Go , Eevee !
were unveiled during a press conference in Japan on May 30 , 2018 .
They are primarily aimed toward a younger audience and those who are new to the Pokémon franchise .
At the time of announcement game director Junichi Masuda mentioned that the games have been in development for around two years .
Junichi Masuda also stated that he considered the games to be remakes of Pokémon Yellow , explaining that Yellow " resonated " best with younger players because it incorporated elements from the Pokémon anime television series .
Although they are the first main series Pokémon role - playing games for the Nintendo Switch , Let 's Go , Pikachu !
and Let 's Go , Eevee !
are a separate project from the Pokémon game on the same platform that was teased during Nintendo 's E3 2017
Nintendo Direct on June 13 , 2017 presentation which is scheduled to be released in " late 2019 . "
Masuda stated that he decided to make Eevee the mascot of the second game due to its popularity and abundance of fan art .
He had previously considered Psyduck but ultimately changed his mind , stating that it was due to Psyduck being the same color as Pikachu .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The games were released internationally on November 16 , 2018 .
Bundles of the games with the Poké Ball Plus controller were announced , as well as Nintendo Switch console bundles featuring the game , gold and yellow colored Joy - Con , and a dock with artwork of Eevee and Pikachu .
On September 21 , 2018 , it was announced that Amazon began to offer pre - orders for the Let 's Go , Pikachu !
and Let 's Go , Eevee !
Switch bundle .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Let 's Go received " generally favorable reviews " from critics , according to review aggregator Metacritic .
Critics applauded the gameplay , accessibility , nostalgia and charm of the game , while criticising its motion controls .
IGN 's Miranda Sanchez praised the game 's catching mechanic which drew inspiration from the gameplay of Pokemon GO .
She mentioned that she could " prioritize catching the Pokemon
I actually wanted " and avoiding undesired ones thanks to the games ' new overworld view of the Pokemon .
SALES Section::::Sales .
On November 22 , 2018 , The Pokémon Company announced that the game sold over 3million units worldwide in its first week of release , making it the fastest - selling Nintendo Switch game .
In Japan , Let 's Go topped the software sales chart and sold 661,240 physical retail units in its opening weekend , and was responsible for almost quadrupling Nintendo Switch hardware sales for the week .
It remained at the top of the Japanese charts in its third week , bringing its physical retail sales to 1,012,247 units in Japan as of December 12 , 2018 .
The NPD reported the launch sales of Let 's Go in North America as being positive and described it as " the most important launch " of the year .
On streaming site Twitch , Pokémon : Let 's Go was the most - viewed game on launch day with 125,457 viewers , above Fortnite .
Within ten days of release , the game sold over 1.5million units in the United States , as of November 26 , 2018 .
In the United Kingdom , the game launched with 116,000 physical retail sales in its opening weekend , becoming the top - selling game of the week , despite competition from new releases such as Spyro Reignited Trilogy , Fallout 76 and Hitman 2 .
Let 's Go also had a positive impact on Switch hardware sales , which in turn boosted sales of other Switch games including several Mario games , and Just Dance 2019 .
Individually , Let 's Go , Pikachu debuted at third place in the UK 's all - format sales charts , and Let 's Go , Eevee placed sixth on the same chart .
UK sales were down 60 % on the sales of Pokémon Sun and Moon , the preceding games in the franchise , due to the Switch having a smaller install base than the 3DS and stock problems .
SEE ALSO
* List of Pokémon video games
* Pokémon FireRed and LeafGreen
*
Pokémon Yellow
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS