LEGENDS OF TOMORROW ( SEASON 4 )
The fourth season of the American television series Legends of Tomorrow , which is based on characters from DC Comics , premiered on The CW on October 22 , 2018 , and is set to consist of 16 episodes .
The season follows the Legends , a dysfunctional team of time - traveling superheroes and anti - heroes , and their mission to recapture the magical fugitives that they accidentally released throughout time .
It is set in the Arrowverse , sharing continuity with the other television series of the universe , and is a spin - off of Arrow and The Flash .
The season is produced by Berlanti Productions , Warner Bros. Television , and DC Entertainment , with Phil Klemmer and Keto Shimizu serving as showrunners .
The season was ordered in April 2018 , and production began that July .
Principal cast members Brandon Routh , Caity Lotz , Maisie Richardson - Sellers , Tala Ashe , Amy Louise Pemberton , Nick Zano , and Dominic Purcell return from previous seasons , while Matt Ryan , Jes Macallan , and Courtney Ford were promoted to the principal cast from their recurring statuses in season three .
They are joined by new cast member Ramona Young .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
After killing the demon Mallus , the Legends were ready to relax until John Constantine informed them that , in solving one problem , they created a much larger one .
When the Legends let time crumble to release and defeat Mallus , the barrier between worlds softened .
History is now infected with " Fugitives " – magical creatures from myths and fairy tales .
Having been expelled throughout time by people like Constantine , they are now returning to the real world in droves and making a mess of things .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* Brandon Routh as Ray Palmer / Atom * Caity Lotz as Sara Lance / White Canary * Maisie Richardson - Sellers as Charlie
* Tala Ashe as Zari Tomaz
* Jes Macallan as Ava Sharpe
* Courtney Ford as Nora Darhk *
Amy Louise Pemberton as Gideon
* Ramona Young as Mona Wu * Nick Zano as Nate
Heywood / Steel * Dominic Purcell as Mick Rory / Heat Wave
* Matt Ryan as John Constantine
RECURRING
* Adam Tsekhman as Gary Green
* Tom Wilson as Hank Heywood
* Christian Keyes as Desmond * Darien Martin as Konane / Kaupe
GUEST
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
At the Television Critics Association winter press tour in January 2018 , The CW president Mark Pedowitz said he was " optimistic " and " confident " about Arrow and the other Arrowverse shows returning next season , but added that it was too soon to announce anything just yet .
On April 2 , The CW renewed the series for its fourth season .
Marc Guggenheim stepped down as co - showrunner at the end of the third season , with co - showrunner Phil Klemmer originally set to emerge as sole showrunner for the fourth season .
However , Keto Shimizu ultimately replaced Guggenheim as co - showrunner , to serve alongside Klemmer for this season .
Guggenheim , the series ' co - developer along with Klemmer , remains involved as an executive consultant .
WRITING Section::::Writing .
Phil Klemmer said that Mallus , the main antagonist of the third season , was " a sort of bellwether of bad guys to come in Season 4 " , which he said would go deep into the " world of fantastic myths and monsters " , without abandoning the time travel nature of the series .
He also said the season would further explore the Time Bureau , which was introduced in season three .
Klemmer added that at least one of the Legends would " break bad " in the season .
Tala Ashe , who joined the series as Zari Tomaz during the third season , said the fourth season would further explore the character 's backstory , in addition to the prejudice and xenophobia experienced by her .
Courtney Ford , who recurred in the third season as Damien Darhk 's daughter Nora , hoped the fourth season would explore what the character is without the influence of her father and Mallus .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Main cast members Brandon Routh , Caity Lotz , Amy Louise Pemberton , Dominic Purcell , Nick Zano , and Tala Ashe return from previous seasons as Ray Palmer / Atom , Sara Lance / White Canary , Gideon , Mick Rory / Heat Wave , Nate Heywood / Steel , and Zari Tomaz , respectively .
Maisie Richardson - Sellers , who played Amaya Jiwe / Vixen in seasons two and three , also returned as a series regular , portraying a new character named Charlie , one of the season 's magical fugitives .
While Sellers spoke with an American accent when playing Amaya , she speaks with her native British accent when playing Charlie .
In July 2018 , Ramona Young was added to the main cast as Alaska Yu , though her character was ultimately named Mona Wu .
Matt Ryan , Jes Macallan and Courtney Ford , who recurred in the third season as John Constantine , Ava Sharpe and Nora Darhk respectively , were promoted to regular status for the fourth season .
Keiynan Lonsdale , who portrayed Wally West / Kid Flash as a regular in the latter half of the third season , will not return in the same capacity for the fourth season .
He cited his reason being his desire to seek other acting opportunities .
This is the first season not to feature Arthur Darvill , who starred as Rip Hunter in the first two seasons , and recurred in the third season .
It is also the first not to feature Victor Garber and Franz Drameh , who starred as Martin Stein and Jefferson Jackson respectively , in the previous seasons .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Production for the season began on July 5 , 2018 , in Vancouver , and is expected to conclude on January 24 , 2019 .
RELEASE
BROADCAST Section::::Release .
Section::::Broadcast .
On June 20 , The CW released its fall schedule , revealing that the series would move from the 8:00 pm Monday time - slot to the 9:00 pm time - slot , to serve as the lead - out to Arrow .
The season began airing in the United States on The CW on October 22 , 2018 .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
The main cast of the season as well as Phil Klemmer attended San Diego Comic - Con on July 21 , 2018 , to promote the season .
On October 15 , 2018 , Routh released a mock political ad on his Twitter page , voiced by Zano .
The ad jokingly claimed that Arrow , The Flash , and Supergirl were trying to keep attention away from Legends of Tomorrow , followed by many headlines as well as real and fake quotes praising the series .
RECEPTION RATINGS CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes reports a 94 % approval rating for the fourth season , with an average rating of 8.08/10 based on 33 reviews .
REFERENCES Section::::References .
General references EXTERNAL LINKS