HAWAII FIVE-0 ( 2010 TV SERIES , SEASON 9 )
The ninth season of the CBS police procedural drama series Hawaii Five-0 premiered on September 28 , 2018 for the 2018–19 television season .
CBS renewed the series for a ninth season in April 2018 .
The season is expected to contain 22 episodes .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN CAST
* Alex O'Loughlin as Lieutenant Commander Steven " Steve " McGarrett , United States Navy Reserve
* Scott Caan as Detective Sergeant Daniel " Danny
" " Danno " Williams * Ian Anthony Dale as Adam Noshimuri * Meaghan Rath as Officer Tani Rey
* Jorge Garcia as Special Consultant Jerry Ortega
* Beulah Koale as Officer Junior Reigns
* Taylor Wily as Kamekona Tupuola * Dennis Chun as Sergeant Duke Lukela , Honolulu Police Department * Kimee Balmilero as Dr. Noelani Cunha , Medical Examiner * Chi McBride as Captain Lou Grover 200TH EPISODE Section::::Cast and characters .
Section::::Main cast .
Section::::200th episode .
In the two - hundredth episode which took place in the year 1941 , the main cast portrayed characters separate from their normal roles .
The actor / character portrayals in the episode are as follows : * Alex O'Loughlin as Steve McGarrett , grandfather of the present day character .
* Scott Caan as Milton Cooper
* Ian Anthony Dale as Earl Blackstone * Meaghan Rath as Alexa Alana * Jorge Garcia as Officer Mike Flanagan
* Beulah Koale as Evan Kekoa
*
Taylor Wily as " Biggie " Tupa * Dennis Chun as Sergeant Naskiuchi * Kimee Balmilero as Doctor * Chi McBride as Captain Charles Sumner
RECURRING
* Shawn Thomsen as Officer Pua Kai
* Rochelle Aytes as Agent Greer * Shawn Mokuahi Garnett as Flippa GUEST STARS
* Mark Dacascos as
Wo Fat * Jack Coleman as Miller
* Duane " Dog " Chapman as himself * Andrew Lawrence as Eric Russo * Laura Mellow as Nalani Lukela * Cidni Romias as Akela Nakahara
* Eric Steinberg as Captain Keo
* Richard Herd as Milton Cooper * Chris Mulkey as William Pettifer * Mariano Farrar as Clarence Whitmour
* Clifton Powell as Percy Lee Grover Jr. * Louis Gossett Jr. as Percy Grover Sr .
* Gladys Knight as Ella Grover * Michelle Hurd as Renee Grover
* Chosen Jacobs as Will Grover * Al Harrington as Mamo Kahike
* Zach Sulzbach as Charlie
* Terry O'Quinn as Joe White * Michelle Borth as Catherine Rollins * Chris Vance as Harry Langford * David Keith as Wade Gutches * Teilor Grubbs as Grace Williams EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
CROSSOVERS Section::::Crossovers .
On July 19 , 2018 , it was announced that the season is set to see multiple crossovers with Magnum P.I ..
Lenkov confirmed that Kimee Balmilero and Taylor Wily will make guest appearances as their Hawaii Five-0 characters in episodes one and two of Magnum P.I. respectively .
Meanwhile , Alex O'Loughlin is set to cross paths with Jay Hernandez 's character , Thomas Magnum , later in the season .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
On April 18 , 2018 , CBS renewed the series for a ninth season .
Peter M. Lenkov returned as executive producer and showrunner after signing a new multi - year deal with CBS .
On July 9 , 2018 , it was announced that the ninth season is set to premiere on September 28 , 2018 for the 2018–19 television season .
The season is expected to contain the series 200th episode .
The season is expected to contain 22 episodes .
It was later revealed that the first episode of the season would be a remake of the 1968 episode from the original series , Hawaii Five - O , also entitled " Cocoon " On August 18 , 2018 it was revealed that the 200th episode of the series would be the seventh aired episode of the season .
Other series co - star Chi McBride , wrote an episode for the season .
On Wednesday , August 22 , 2018 with the anticipated landfall of Hurricane Lane , a Category 4 hurricane , in Hawaii CBS reported that they " were closely monitoring the situation " but that production would continue as planned .
The following day CBS temporarily shut down production of both Hawaii Five-0 and Magnum P.I. until further notice .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Filming for the season officially began on July 10 , 2018 with a traditional Hawaiian blessing and is expected to conclude on April 19 , 2019 .
Bryan Spicer is returned as producing director and is expected to direct five episodes of the season .
On July 11 , 2018 , it was revealed that the first episode to film would be third aired episode of the season .
On July 20 , 2018 Lenkov reported that Alex O ' Loughlin is set to direct another episode .
Filming on the first filmed episode of the season officially concluded on July 20 , 2018 .
Filming was temporarily cancelled in August 2018 as a result of an incoming hurricane .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
When asked about the mid - season finale , Lenkov stated , " We 're bringing back a lot of people that over the years have helped us " .
On August 22 , 2018 , it was reported by TV Line that Rochelle Aytes had been cast in a guest role as a character named Greer .
Mark Dacascos is set to return to the series as Wo Fat for the first time since the fifth season .
It was later announced that Louis Gossett Jr. and Gladys Knight are set to guest star in an episode as the father and mother respectively of McBride 's character , Lou Grover .
On November 20 , 2018 it was announced that Terry O'Quinn would return in the season 's mid - season finale , while on December 4 , 2018 it was reported that former main cast member Michelle Borth would return for the mid - season premiere .
Ian Anthony Dale is set to return to the series in episode six due to conflicting filming of other CBS television series Salvation in which he is also a series regular .
RELEASE AND MARKETING Section::::Release and marketing .
The teaser trailer for the first episode was released on September 12 , 2018 .
The season has been marketed as the series ' fiftieth anniversary , being fifty years since the premiere of the original series in 1968 .
On August 13 , 2018 , it was announced that the season would have an advanced premiere screening along with an advanced premiere screening of Magnum P.I. RECEPTION RATINGS Section::::Reception .
Section::::Ratings . !
№ !
Episode !
Air date !
18 - 49rating !
Viewers(millions ) !
Weeklyrank !
Live+718 - 49 !
Live+7 viewers(millions )
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* List of Hawaii Five-0 episodes at The Futon Critic