ARROW ( SEASON 7 )
The seventh season of the American television series Arrow , which is based on the DC Comics character Oliver Queen / Green Arrow , premiered on The CW on October 15 , 2018 and is set to consist of 22 episodes .
The season follows Oliver , a former billionaire businessman and politician , and the aftermath of outing himself as a vigilante .
It is set in the Arrowverse , sharing continuity with the other television series of the universe .
The season is produced by Berlanti Productions , Warner Bros. Television , and DC Entertainment .
This is the first season with Beth Schwartz as showrunner following the departures of Marc Guggenheim and Wendy Mericle .
The season was ordered in April 2018 , and production began that July .
Stephen Amell stars as Oliver , with principal cast members David Ramsey , Emily Bett Rickards , Echo Kellum , Rick Gonzalez , Juliana Harkavy , and Katie Cassidy also returning from previous seasons .
Colton Haynes , a principal cast member for seasons two and three and a special guest actor for seasons four and six , was reinstated as a series regular for the seventh season .
They are joined by Kirk Acevedo , who was promoted to a series regular from his recurring status in the previous season , and new cast member Sea Shimooka .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
Gregory Smith will direct an episode this season .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* Stephen Amell as Oliver Queen / Green Arrow * David Ramsey as John Diggle * Emily Bett Rickards as Felicity Smoak / Overwatch * Echo Kellum as Curtis Holt * Rick Gonzalez as René Ramirez / Wild Dog * Juliana Harkavy as Dinah Drake / Black Canary * Colton Haynes as Roy Harper * Kirk Acevedo as Ricardo Diaz / Dragon * Katie Cassidy as Laurel Lance / Black Siren * Sea Shimooka as Emiko Queen / Green Arrow
RECURRING
* Michael Jai White as Ben Turner * Vinnie Jones as Danny Brickwell * Cody Runnels as Derek Sampson
* Ben Lewis as adult William Clayton * Brendan Fletcher as Stanley Dover
* Holly Elissa as Red Dart
* Miranda Edwards as Honor / Silencer
* Michael Jonsson as Bear / Kodiak * Katherine McNamara as Maya / Blackstar GUEST PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
At the Television Critics Association winter press tour in January 2018 , The CW president Mark Pedowitz said he was " optimistic " and " confident " about Arrow and the other Arrowverse shows returning next season , but added that it was too soon to announce anything just yet .
On April 2 , The CW renewed the series for its seventh season .
Marc Guggenheim and Wendy Mericle stepped down as showrunners at the end of the sixth season , with veteran writer Beth Schwartz taking over as sole showrunner for the seventh season .
Guggenheim , the series ' co - developer , remains involved as an executive consultant .
WRITING Section::::Writing .
In May 2018 , outgoing showrunner Marc Guggenheim revealed that the Longbow Hunters , a villainous organization in DC Comics , would be teased in the sixth season finale before being introduced in the seventh season .
Following the conclusion of the sixth season , which marked the first time in the series ' history where the season 's main antagonist was still at large , Guggenheim 's successor Beth Schwartz confirmed that Ricardo Diaz / Dragon would return and , like his comic book counterpart , establish the Longbow Hunters , " a legendary group of assassins Diaz recruits to get back at Team Arrow for toppling his nascent criminal empire at the end of season 6 . "
Schwartz revealed that " redemption " would be the theme of the seventh season , " since last season when Oliver outed his identity , the city is a little bit mixed about how they feel about the Green Arrow . "
Stephen Amell commented that there is " nothing about [ Oliver ] that 's heroic " in the season premiere .
While Schwartz confirmed that other characters would be influenced by the season 's theme , she stated that after Black Siren committed several murders during her partnership with Diaz , she still has " a large way to go to redeem herself from last season .
"
The previous season also left off with Team Arrow fractured and divided .
This season sees it 's members redefining their roles and what it means to be heroes to an anti - vigilante Star City , while honoring " the sacrifice Oliver made for them .
"
The showrunner named Felicity 's storyline as one of her favorites for the season 's first half .
" We played her pretty parallel to Oliver , where she 's hiding and not being herself .
She 's in protective custody , but when someone attacks her family , she ca n't ignore that , so she has to fight back . "
Schwartz also said that the season would be " grounded " and have a " dark " tone , similar to that of the first season .
The seventh season is the first time the series will employ a female - dominated writing staff , with new writers being introduced this season .
Schwartz said the seventh season would not be based on David S. Goyer 's scrapped film Green Arrow : Escape From Super Max , which would have featured Oliver Queen being arrested , exposed as the Green Arrow , and attempting a prison escape .
Amell reported that the season would employ a new storytelling technique .
This was later revealed to be sporadic flashforwards , as opposed to the weekly flashbacks of seasons past .
Schwartz named Westworld and This Is Us as inspirations for the time structure , and Prison Break as an inspiration for the prison arc .
Amell also revealed that he requested that the seventh season be written as if it were the series ' last .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Main cast members Stephen Amell , David Ramsey , Emily Bett Rickards , Echo Kellum , Rick Gonzalez , Juliana Harkavy , and Katie Cassidy return from previous seasons as Oliver Queen / Green Arrow , John Diggle / Spartan , Felicity Smoak / Overwatch , Curtis Holt / Mister Terrific , René Ramirez / Wild Dog , Dinah Drake / Black Canary , and Laurel Lance / Black Siren , respectively .
The seventh season is the first not to feature original cast members Willa Holland and Paul Blackthorne , who play Thea Queen / Speedy and Quentin Lance , respectively , following both actors ' departures during the previous season .
On April 9 , 2018 , it was announced that Colton Haynes would return as a series regular for the seventh season after previously starring in the second and third seasons and making guest appearances in the fourth and sixth seasons .
The following month , Guggenheim confirmed that Haynes would be reprising his role as Roy Harper / Arsenal from previous appearances , and not another version of the character .
On October 11 , Kirk Acevedo was promoted to series regular status after previously recurring in the sixth season as main antagonist , Ricardo Diaz / Dragon .
Sea Shimooka plays Oliver 's half - sister Emiko Queen .
On July 21 at the series ' San Diego Comic - Con 2018 panel , it was announced that the Longbow Hunters had been cast with Holly Elissa as Red Dart , Miranda Edwards as Silencer , and Michael Jonsson as Kodiak .
It was also revealed that Michael Jai White , Vinnie Jones , and Cody Runnels would additionally recur as Ben Turner , Danny Brickwell , and Derek Sampson from previous seasons .
On September 22 , Katherine McNamara was cast in a recurring role as Maya .
Jack Moore returned in the role of Oliver 's son William Clayton , with Ben Lewis portraying the character in flashforwards .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Production for the season began on July 6 , 2018 , in Vancouver , British Columbia , and is set to conclude on April 18 , 2019 .
In May 2018 , Stephen Amell revealed that co - star David Ramsey would direct the eleventh episode of the season , marking Ramsey 's directorial debut .
Amell also grew a beard during the filming hiatus to accurately resemble the Green Arrow of the comics .
ARROWVERSE TIE - INS Section::::Arrowverse tie - ins .
In May 2018 , Stephen Amell announced at The CW upfronts that the next Arrowverse crossover would feature Batwoman and Gotham City .
The crossover " Elseworlds " is slated to launch a 2019 solo series for the character .
RELEASE
BROADCAST Section::::Release .
Section::::Broadcast .
In May 2018 , it was announced that Arrow would move to Mondays for its seventh season , a first for the series , due to The CW 's programming expansion to Sunday nights .
On June 20 , the network released its fall schedule , revealing that the series would additionally move from the 9:00 pm time - slot to the 8:00 pm time - slot , to serve as the lead - in to Legends of Tomorrow .
The season premiered on The CW in the United States on October 15 , 2018 .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
The main cast of the season as well as executive producer Beth Schwartz attended San Diego Comic - Con on July 21 , 2018 to promote the season .
RECEPTION RATINGS CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes reports a 96 % approval rating for the seventh season , with an average rating of 7.7/10 based on 85 reviews .
Reviewing for Den of Geek , Delia Harrington gave the premiere a rating of 3/5 .
She opined that Roy 's inclusion in the season made his " moving sendoff " with Thea from last season feel " cheap " and that she remained " cautious " about the flashforward structure , but said that the episode was " solid " nonetheless .
She concluded , " The Arrow Season 7 premiere manages to both wipe the slate clean and nod in the direction of the show 's early glory . "
IGNs Jesse Schedeen wrote , " Arrows Season 7 premiere kicks off the most significant status quo change in the series ' history .
Some of these sweeping changes are already working in the show 's favor . "
He gave the episode a rating of 7.1/10 , adding , " Arrows seventh season has a promising start , though the premiere drags whenever Oliver Queen is n't the focus .
"
Both Chancellor Agard of Entertainment Weekly and Allison Shoemaker of The A.V. Club gave the premiere a " B " grade and noted a comparison to ABC 's Lost , with Agard praising Amell and Rickards ' performances .
Shoemaker explained that the episode " revisits a lot of familiar territory , but it breaks new ground for Arrow while having its priorities in precisely the right place .
It 's the beginning of a new era for Arrow , and whether you credit this episode 's success to either focus or flash - forwards , it 's a promising start . " NOTES REFERENCES